---
title: "Section 3"
author: Andy Grove
source_type: book_chapter
book_title: "High Output Management"
chapter_number: 3
scraped_date: '2026-01-19'
---


harder. Here we've not changed
what work we do, we've just
instituted ways to do it faster—
getting more activities per
employee-hour to go on inside the
black box. Because the output of the
black box is proportional to the
activity that occurs within it, we will
get more output per hour. There is a
second way to improve productivity.
We can change the nature of the
work performed: what we do, not
how fast we do it. We want to
increase the ratio of output to
activity, thereby increasing output
even if the activity per employeehour remains the same. As the


HIGH OUTPUT MANAGEMENT


I0UTPUT >


Productivity can be increased by


performing the work activities at a
higher rate ...


IOUTRjf >


C^>


or by increasing the leverage of the
activities.


slogan has it, we want to "work
smarter, not harder/' Here I'd like
to introduce the concept of
leverage, which is the output
generated by a specific type of work
activity. An activity with high
leverage will generate a high level
of output; an activity with low
leverage, a low-level of output. For
example, a waiter able to boil two
eggs and operate two toasters can
deliver two breakfasts for almost

the same amount of work as one.


His output per activity, and
therefore his leverage, is high. A
waiter who can handle only one egg
and one toaster at a time possesses
lower output and leverage. The
software engineer using a
programming language rather like
English, later to be translated by a
compiler, can solve many problems
per hour of programming. His
output and leverage are high. A
software engineer using a more
cumbersome programming method
of ones and zeros will require many
more hours to solve the same
number of problems. His output
and leverage are low. Thus, a very


important way to increase
productivity is to arrange the work
flow inside our black box so that it
will be characterized by high output
per activity, which is to say highleverage activities.


Automation is certainly one way to
improve the leverage of all types of
work. Having machines to help
them, human beings can create
more output. But in both widget
manufacturing and administrative
work, something else can also
increase the productivity of the
black box. This is called work
simplification. To get leverage this
way, you first need to create a flow


chart of the production process as it
exists. Every single step must be
shown on it; no step should be
omitted in order to pretty things up
on paper. Second, count the number
of steps in the flow chart so that
you know how many you started
with. Third, set a rough target for
reduction of the number of steps. In
the first round of work
simplification, our experience
shows that you can reasonably
expect a 30 to 50 percent reduction.


To implement the actual
simplification, you must question
why each step is performed.
Typically, you will find that many


steps exist in your work flow for no
good reason. Often they are there
by tradition or because formal
procedure ordains it, and nothing
practical requires their inclusion.
Remember, the "visa factory" at our
embassy in Britain didn't really
have to process 100 percent of the
applicants. So no matter what
reason may be given for a step, you
must critically question each and
throw out those that common sense
says you can do without. We found
that in a wide range of
administrative activities


at Intel, substantial reduction—
about 30 percent could


be achieved in the number of steps
required to perform various tasks.


Of course, the principle of work
simplification is hardly new in the
widget manufacturing arts. In fact,
this is one of the things industrial
engineers have been doing for a
hundred years. But the application
of the principle to improve the
productivity of the "soft
professions"— the administrative,
professional, and managerial
workplace—is new and slow to take
hold. The major problem to be
overcome is defining what the
output of such work is or should be.
As we will see, in the work of the


soft professions, it becomes very
difficult to distinguish between
output and activity. And as noted,
stressing output is the key to
improving productivity, while
looking to increase activity can
result in just the opposite.


.Fart Iwo


MANAGEMENT


IS A TEAM GAME


3


Managerial Leverage


- " Tr"", >"


What Is a Manager's Outputf


I asked a group of middle managers
just that question. I got these

responses:


judgments and opinions


direction


allocation of resources


mistakes detected


personnel trained and subordinates
developed


courses taught


products planned


commitments negotiated


Do these things really constitute
the output of a manager? I don't
think so. They are instead activities,
or descriptions of what managers
do as they try to create a final
result, or output. What, then, is a
manager's output? At Intel, if he is
in charge of a wafer fabrication
plant, his output consists of
completed, high-quality, fully
processed silicon wafers. If he
supervises a design group, his


output consists of completed
designs that work correctly and are
ready to go into manufacturing. If a
manager is the principal of a high
school, his output will be trained


and educated students who have
either completed their schooling or
are ready to move on to the next
year of their studies. If a manager is
a surgeon, his output is a fully
recovered, healed patient. We can
sum matters up with the
proposition that:


The output of his organization A
manager's output = +


The output of the neighboring
organizations under his influence


Why? Because business and
education and even surgery
represent work done by teams.


A manager can do his "own" job, his
individual work, and do it well, but
that does not constitute his output.
If the manager has a group of
people reporting to him or a circle
of people influenced by him, the
manager's output must be
measured by the output created by
his subordinates and associates. If
the manager is a knowledge
specialist, a know-how manager, his


potential for influencing
"neighboring" organizations is
enormous. The internal consultant
who supplies needed insight to a
group struggling with a problem
will affect the work and the output
of the entire group. Similarly, if a
lawyer acquires a regulatory permit
for a drug company, he will release
the flow of the result of many years
of research at that company to the
public. Or a marketing analyst who
reviews mountains of product,
market, and competitive
information, analyzes market
research, and makes fact-finding
visits can direcdy affect the output


of many "neighboring"
organizations. His interpretations
of the data and his
recommendations will perhaps
guide the activities for the whole
company. Thus, the definition of
"manager" should be broadened:
individual contributors who gather
and disseminate know-how and

information should also be seen as
middle managers, because they
exert great power within the
organization.


But the key definition here is that
the output of a manager is a result
achieved by a group either under
his supervision or under his


influence. While the manager's own
work is clearly very important, that
in itself does not create output. His
organization does. By analogy, a
coach or a quarterback alone does
not score touchdowns and win
games. Entire teams with their
participation and guidance and
direction do. League standings are
kept by team, not by individual.
Business—and this means not just
the business of commerce but the
business of education, the business
of government, the business of
medicine—is a team activity. And,
always, it takes a team to


win,


It is important to understand that a
manager will find himself engaging
in an array of activities in order to
affect output. As the middle
managers I queried said, a manager
must form opinions and make
judgments, he must provide
direction, he must allocate
resources, he must detect mistakes,
and so on. All these are necessary to
achieve output. But output and
activity are by no means the same
thing.


Consider my own managerial role.
As president of a company, I can
affect output through my direct
subordinates—group general


managers and others like them— by
performing supervisory activities. I
can also influence groups not under
my direct supervision by making
observations and suggestions to
those who manage them. Both
types of activity will, I hope,
contribute to my output as a
manager by contributing to the
output of the company as a whole. I
was once asked by a middle
manager at Intel how I could teach
in-plant courses, visit
manufacturing plants, concern
myself with the problems of people
several levels removed from me in
the organization, 11 and still have


time to do my job. I asked him what
he thought my job was. He thought
for a moment, and then answered
"his own question, "I guess those
things are your job too, aren't
they?" They are absolutely my


job—not my entire job, but part of
it, because they help add to the
output of Intel.


Let me give another example.
Cindy, an engineer at Intel,
supervises an engineering group in
a wafer fabrication plant. She also
spends some of her time as a
member of an advisory body that
establishes standard procedures by


which all the plants throughout the
company perform a certain
technical process. In both roles,
Cindy contributes to the output of
the wafer fabrication plants. As a
supervising engineer, she performs
activities that increase the output of
the plant in which she works; as a
member of the advisory body, she
provides specialized knowledge that
will influence and increase the
output of "neighboring
organizations"—all the other Intel
wafer fabrication plants.


Let's refer again to our black box. If
the machinery within an
organization can be compared to a


series of gears, we can visualize
how a middle manager affects
output. In times of crisis, he
provides power to the organization.
When things aren't working as
smoothly as they should, he applies
a bit of oil. And, of course, he
provides intelligence to the
machine to direct its purpose.


"Daddy, What Do You Really Dot"


Most of us have had to struggle to
answer that nu^Hnn What we
actually do is difficult to pin down
and sum up. Much of it often seems
so inconsequential that our position
in the business hardly seems


justified. Part of the problem here
stems from the distinction between
our activities, which is what we
actually do, and our output, winch
is what we achieve. The latter
seems important, significant, and
worthwhile. The former often
seems trivial, insignificant, and
messy. But a surgeon whose output
is a cured patient spends" his time
scrubbing and cutting auu suturing,
and this hardly sounds very
respectable either.


Managerial Leverage


43


To find out what we managers
really do, let's take a look at one of
my busier days, shown in the table
below. Here I describe the activity
in which I was engaged, explain it a
bit, and categorize it into types we
shall examine in the balance of the
chapter.


A Day from My Life


Time and Activity


8:00-8:30


Met with a manager who had
submitted his resignation to leave
for another company.


Incoming telephone call from a
competitor.


8:30-9:00


Read mail from the previous


afternoon.


explanation (Type of Activity)


I listened to his reasons (information-gathering), felt he could be
turned around and saved for Intel.
Encouraged him to talk to certain
other managers about a career
change (nudge), and decided to
pursue this matter with them


myself (deci-stQn-maldng),


Call was ostensibly about a meeting
of an industry-wide society, but in
reality he was feeling out how I saw
business conditions. I did the same.
(Informatim-gathering.)


I scribbled messages on about half
of it, some of which were
expressions of encouragement or
disapproval, others exhortations to
take certain types of action
(nudges). One was the denial of a
request to proceed


KICK OUTPUT MANAGEMENT


Time and Activity


9:00-12:00


Executive Staff Meeting (a regular
weekly meeting of the company's
senior management). Subjects
covered at this particular one:


—Review of the prior month's
incoming order and shipment rates.


—Discussion to set priorities for the
upcoming annual planning process.


—Review of the status of a major
marketing program (scheduled
subject).


Explanation (Type of Activity)


with a particular small project
(decision-making). (Of course,
information-gathering took place in
all of these cases, too.)


—Review of a program to reduce the
manufacturing cycle time of a
particular product line (scheduled
subject).


(Information-gathering)


(Decision-making)


This came about through a prior
decision that this program was


faltering and required review. We
found it was doing a little bit better
than before (informationgathering), but the presentation
still elicited a lot of comments and
suggestions (nudges) from various
members of the audience.


The presentation indicated that the
program was in good shape. (It
represented only informationgathering; no further action was
stimulated.)


Managerial Leverage


45


Time and Activity


12:00-1:00


Lunch in the company cafeteria.


1:00-2:00


Meeting regarding a specific


product-quality problem.


2:00-4:00


Lecture at our employee orientation

program.


Explanation (Type of Activity)


I happened to sit with members of
our training organization, who
complained about the difficulty
they had in getting me and other
senior managers to participate in
training at our foreign locations
(inforinaticn-gath£ringy This was
news to me. I made a note to follow
up with my own schedule, as well as
with my staff, and to nudge them
into doing a better job supporting
the foreign training program.


The bulk of the meeting involved
getting sufficient information on
the status of the product and the
corrective action that had been
implemented (infamatim-gather

ing). The meeting ended in a
dedsion made by the division
manager, with my concurrence, to
resume shipment of the product.


This is a program in which senior
management gives all professional
employees a presentation
describing the objectives, history,
management


Time and Activity Explanation


(Type of Activity)


systems, etc., of the company and
its major groups. I am the first
lecturer in the series, l his clearly


represented information-giving, and
I was a role model not only in
communicating the importance we
place on training, but also, by my
handling of questions and
comments, in representing, in living
form, some of the values of the
company. The nature of the
questions, at the same time, gave
me a feeling for the concerns and
understanding level of a large
number of employees to whom I
would not otherwise have access. So
this also represented informationgathering, characteristic of the
"visit" type in its efficiency. 4:00
4:45


fcjheoffice.retunmgphone I
disapproved granting a


compensation increase to a
particular employee, which I
thought was way outside of the
norm (clearly a decision). I decided
to conduct a meeting with a group
of people to decide what
organization would move to a new
site we were opening in another
state. (1 his was a decision to hold a
decision-making meeting )


4:45-5:00 S


Met with my assistant. bussed a
variety of re

Time and Activity Explanation


(Type of Activity)


quests for my time for a number of
meetings in the upcoming week.
Suggested alternatives where I
decided not to attend.


5:00-6:15


Read the day's mail, includ- As with
the morning's mail ing progress
reports. reading, this was
information

gathering, interspersed with
nudging and decision-making


through my annotations and
messages scribbled on much of it.


When you look at what happened,
you won't see any obvious patterns.
I dealt with things in seemingly
random fashion. My wife's reaction
to my day was that it looked very
much like one of her own. She was
right in noting a similarity. My day
always ends when I'm tired and
ready to go home, not when I'm
done. I am never done. Like a
housewife's, a manager's work is
never done. There is always more to
be done, more that should be done,
always more than can be done.


A manager must keep many balls in
the air at the same time and shift
his energy and attention to
activities that will most increase the
output of his organization. In other
words, he should move to the point
where his leverage will be the
greatest.


As°you can see, much of my day is
spent acquiring information. And as
you can also see, I use many ways
to get it. I read standard reports and
memos but also get information ad
hoc. I talk to people inside and
outside the company, managers at
other firms or financial analysts or
members of the press. Customer


complaints, both external and
internal, are also a very important


HIGH OUTPUT MANAGEMENT


or^zaln^ 0 ™ 3 !!?- F ° r eXampk '
,he Intd «nunmg °If" !?"° n ' Wh f h
? serre as "»instructor, is an inter?


- *" \"""<"er or mine. To cut mvself
nff f .u.


casual complaints of people in that
group wouMbe a ^because I would
miss getting* ^ vTadonof


ell uT ZL, h " *" T™ 1 " su PP' iCT "
People also for Zt T, eCaUSe * ey


want us to do something tor them,
to advance their case, they will
sometime shower us with useful

information. Thil is omeTw w"
should remember, apart from
whether we do as dtey


me' h Z ?£?*" ** * e info ™«ion

most useful to


frl " • 1 SUS / eCt most usefal to all

managers, comes


Acne's fma CaSUal 7 CTbal changes.
This usual^ reacnes a manager
much faster than anything written


t ra tS fc raore tirae,y the ^-w


So why are written reports
necessary at alp Thev nhvi


^te ' PrOTWe *«* -fornration."^,
hev" not


m^ut Tnd " a,T Ve "V"* he 'P » ™"
da * * d hoc mputs and catch, m
safety-net fashion, anything you


d^re« e funcf ed - *? ? P ° m *° haVe

-oS 1*%


AeTuThort for^Ht ^ "* fOImUlated
^ ™«» verh," v ill ™ d l ° * more P
recise t^n he might be


than a wav toTnl / ^ mm of sel f

discipline


Don ?« communicate mformation.

WW^ the re

port is important; reading it often is
not g


1 here are many parallels to this. As
w^ will «. i,.~


people ™ P Z Z^T^ a ? p,tal ending
request, juggling and h?,"*-"" sou 's
«>rching analysis and a 6 a«" S, «.«
u is ttus mental exercise that is

vkuable


The formal authorization Is useful


only because it enforces the
discipline of the process.


To improve and maintain your
capacity to get information, you
have to understand the way it
comes to you. There's a hierarchy
involved. Verbal sources are the
most valuable, but what they
provide is also sketchy, incomplete,
and sometimes inaccurate, like a
newspaper headline that can give
you only the general idea of a story.
A headline can't give any of the
details and might even give you a
distorted idea of what the real story
is. So you then read the newspaper
article itself to find out who, what,


where, why, and how. After this,
you should have some reiteration
and perspective, which can be
compared to reading a news
magazine or even a book. Each level
In your information hierarchy Is
Important, and you can rely on
none alone. Though the most
thorough information might come
from the news magazine, you do
not, of course, want to wait a full
week after an event to find out

about it. Your information sources
should complement one another,
and also be redundant because that
gives you a way to verify what
you've learned.


There is an especially efficient way
to get information, much neglected
by most managers. That is to visit a
particular place in the company and
observe what's going on there. Why
should you do this? Think of what
happens when somebody comes to
see a manager in his office. A
certain stop-and-start dynamics
occurs when the visitor sits down,
something socially dictated. While a
two-minute kernel of information
Is exchanged, the meeting often
takes a half hour. But if a manager
walks through an area and sees a
person with whom he has a twominute concern, he can simply stop,


cover it, and be on his way. Ditto for
the subordinate when he initiates
conversation. Accordingly, such
visits are an extremely effective and
efficient way to transact managerial
business.


Then why are they underutilized?
Because of the awkwardness that
managers feel about walking
through an area without a specific
task in mind. At Intel we combat
this problem by using programmed
visits meant to accomplish formal
tasks, but which also set the stage
for ad hoc mini-transactions. For
example, we ask our°managers to
participate in "Mr. Clean"


inspections, in which they go to a
part of the company that they
normally wouldn't visit, lhe
managers examine the
housekeeping, the arrangement of
things, the labs, and the safety
equipment, and in so doing spend
an hour or so browsing around and
getting acquainted with things
firsthand. As can be seen from my
schedule, a manager not only
gathers information but is also a
source of it. He must convey his
knowledge to members of his own
organization and to other groups he
influences. Beyond relaying facts, a
manager must also communicate


his objectives, priorities, and
preferences as they bear on the way
certain tasks are approached. This is
extremely important, because only
if the manager imparts these will
his subordinates know how to make

decisions themselves that will be
acceptable to the manager, their
supervisor. Thus, transmitting
objectives and preferred approaches
constitutes a key to successful
delegation. As we will see later, a
snared corporate culture becomes
indispensable to a business.
Someone adhering to the values of
a corporate culture—an intelligent
corporate citizen—will behave in


consistent fashion under similar
conditions, which means that
managers don't have to suffer the
inefficiencies engendered by formal
rules, procedures, and regulations
that are sometimes used to get the
same result. 1 he third major kind
of managerialactivity, of course, is
decision-making. To be sure, once
in a while we managers m fact mate
a decision. But for every time that
nappens, we participate in the
making of many, many others, and
we do that in a variety of ways. We
orovide actual inputs or just offer
opinions, we debate the pros


and cons of alternatives and thereby


force a better decision to emerge,
we review decisions made or about
to be made by others, encourage or
discourage them, ratify or veto
them,


just how decisions should be made,
we'll talk about later. Meanwhile,
let's say that decisions can be
separated into two kinds. The
forward-looking sort are made, for
example, in the capital
authorization process, Here we
allocate the financial resources of
the company among various future
undertakings. The second type is
made as we respond to a developing
problem or a crisis, which can


either be technical (a quality
control problem, for example) or
involve people (talking somebody
out of quitting).


It's obvious that your decisionmaking depends finally on how well
you comprehend the facts and
issues facing your business. This is
why information-gathering is so
important in a manager's life. Other
activities—conveying information,
making decisions, and being a role
model for your subordinates—are
all governed by the base of
information that you, the manager,
have about the tasks, the issues, the
needs, and the problems facing your


organization. In short, informationgathering is the basis of all other
managerial work, w r hich is why I
choose to spend so much of my day
doing it.


You often do things at the office
designed to influence events
slightly, maybe making a phone call
to an associate suggesting that a
decision be made in a certain way,
or sending a note or a memo that
shows how you see a particular
situation, or making a comment
during an oral presentation. In such
instances you may be advocating a
preferred course of action, but you
are not issuing an instruction or a


command. Yet you're doing
something stronger than merely
conveying information. Let's call it
"nudging" because through it you
nudge an individual or a meeting in
the direction you would like. This is
an immensely important
managerial activity in which we


engage all the time, and it should be
carefully distinguished from
decision-making that results in
firm, clear directives. In reality, for
every unambiguous decision we
make, we probably nudge things a
dozen times. ^Finally, something
more subtle pervades the day of all
managers. While we move about,


doing what we regard as our jobs,
we are role models for people in our
organization—our subordinates, our
peers, and even our supervisors.
Much has been said and written
about a manager's need to be a
leader. The fact is, no single
managerial activity can be said to
constitute leadership, and nothing
leads as well as example. By this I
mean something straightforward.
Values and behavioral norms are
simply not transmitted easily by
talk or memo, but are conveyed
very effectively bv doinff and doing
visibly.


All managers need to act so that


they can be seen exerting influence,
but they should do so in their own
way. Some of us feel comfortable
dealing with large groups and
talking about our feelings °and
values openly in that fashion.
Others prefer working one-on-one
with people in a quieter, more
intellectual environment, lhese and
other styles of leadership will work,
but only if we recognize and
consciously stress the need for us to
be role models for people in our
organization.


Don't think for a moment that the
way I've described leadership
applies only to large operations. An


insurance agent in a small office
who continually talks with personal
friends on the phone imparts a set
of values about permissible conduct
to everyone working for him. A
lawyer who returns to his office
after lunch a little drunk does the
same. On the other hand, a
supervisor in a company,,arge or
small, who takes his work seriously
exemplifies to his associates the
most important managerial value of
all.


A great deal of a manager's work
has to do with allocating resources:
manpower, money, and capital. But
the single most important resource


that we allocate from one day to the
next is our own time. In principle

more money, more manpower, or
more capital can always be made
available, but our own time is the
one absolutely finite resource we
each have. Its allocation and use

therefore deserve considerable
attention. How you handle your
own time is, in my view, the single
most important aspect of being a
role model and leader.


As you can see, in a typical day of
mine one can count some twentyfive separate activities in which I
participated, mostly informationgathering and -giving, but also


decision-making and nudging. You
can also see that some two thirds of
my time was spent in a meeting of
one kind or another. Before you are
horrified by how much time I spend
in meetings, answer a question:
which of the activities—
information-gathering,
information-giving, decisionmaking, nudging, and being a role
model— could I have performed
outside a meeting? The answer is
practically none. Meetings provide
an occasion for managerial
activities. Getting together with
others is not, of course, an activity—
it is a medium. You as a manager


can do your work in a meeting, in a
memo, or through a loudspeaker for
that matter. But you must choose
the most effective medium for what
you want to accomplish, and that is
the one that gives you the greatest
leverage. More about meetings
later.


Leverage of Managerial Activity


We've established that the output of
a manager is the output of the
various organizations under his
control and his influence. What can
a manager do to increase his
output? To find out, let's look at the
concept of leverage. Leverage is the


measure of the output gener

ated by any given managerial
activity. Accordingly, managerial
output can be linked to managerial
activitv by the equation:


Managerial Output = Output of
organization


= L L X Ai + L 2 X A 2 + . . .


This equation says that for every
activity a manager performs—Aj, A
2, and so on—the output of the
organization should increase by
some degree. The extent to which
that output is thereby increased is


determined by tue leverage of that
activity-^, £,, and so on. A manager
s output is thus the sum of the
result of individual activities having
varying degrees of leverage. Clearly
the Key to mgh output means being
sensitive to the leverage of what
you do during the day.


Managerial productivity—that is,
the outDut of a manager per unit of
time worked—can be increased in
three ways:


i. Increasing the rate with which a
manager performs


his activities, speeding up his work.


2. Increasing the leverage
associated with the various


managerial activities. 3- Shifting the
mix of a manager's activities from
those


with lower to those with higher
leverage.


Let us consider first the leverage of
various types of managerial work.


HIGH-LEVERAGE ACnviTIES


These can be achieved in three basic

ways:


. When many people are affected by
one manager. • ..«en a person's
activity or behavior over a lon<r


period of time is affected by a
manager's brief, well"


focused set of words or actions.


- When a large group's work is
affected by an individual supplying
a unique, key piece of knowledge or
information.


The first is the most obvious
example. Consider Robin, an Intel
finance manager, responsible for
setting up the annual financial


planning process for the company.
When Robin defines in advance
exactly what information needs to
be gathered and presented at each
stage of the planning process and
lays out who is responsible for
what, she directly affects the
subsequent work of perhaps two
hundred people who participate in
the planning process. By spending a
certain amount of time in advance
of the planning activities, Robin will
help to eliminate confusion and
ambiguity for a large population of
managers over an extended period
of time. Consequently, her work
contributes to the productivity of


the entire organization and clearly
has great leverage, leverage that
depends, however, on when it is
performed. Work done in advance
of the planning meeting obviously
has great leverage. If Robin has to
scramble later to help a manager
define guidelines and milestones,
her work will clearly have much
less leverage.