---
subject: Michael Dell
title: Michael Dell, Dell Technologies | David Senra
youtube_url: ''
video_id: michael-dell
publish_date: '2025-10-12'
duration_seconds: 5439.8
duration: '1:30:39'
channel: David Senra Podcast
keywords: []
---

# Michael Dell, Dell Technologies | David Senra

## Transcript

David Senra (00:00:02):
I want to jump right into what we were talking about before we started recording that. You said somebody was, you've been obsessed. You know, you've been running Dell for 41 years. You've been obsessed really since you were like 11 or 12. So you've been running it for 50 years because there was a Dell before a Dell, right? But you were saying somebody was telling you the story about you in middle school. When I was in junior high school in the summers in Houston, there were classes at Rice University for young kids. Okay.
David Senra (00:00:32):
And so you could go to Rice University, take these classes. And my mom, you know, kind of signed me up. And it was great. You know, they had these college professors and they were teaching these classes. And the way I would get to Rice University is I would take the bus from our house, right? And it'll like take you downtown. And I was curious. So I was like, okay, if I just stay on the bus, it takes me all the way downtown to where the really tall buildings are.
David Senra (00:01:05):
So I go down there, it's like really tall buildings. I'm like roaming around, like 11 or 12 years old. And I see like they've got like the stock exchange there and all these tickers going. I'm like, wow, that's pretty cool. So I just started learning about the stock market. So anyway, it's just something I remembered. And, you know, my parents were always talking about financial markets and it just sparked sort of this interest really, really early in life.
David Senra (00:01:37):
There's a great line I've seen from both Ken Griffin and Larry Ellison describing you. This guy was manufacturing computers in America at a time when there was like thousands of other people doing the exact very similar thing. And he was the only one that survived. And the reason I just thought about that is because I was watching this talk that Ken gave, I think at Yale. And he says something, he's like, for reasons I can't explain. I don't know why. I've just been obsessed with the stock market, with business, since I was in the third grade.
David Senra (00:02:09):
And, you know, 60 years later, however old he is, like, that obsession has not dulled. We were just in your office, and you were showing me one of your new unreleased products that we can't film or photograph. But you were like, I was like, this is like a kid on Christmas. Like, you're still. Super cool product. Yeah. I'm very excited. I told you I'll buy one. I think it's cool, too. I'm going to buy one as soon as it comes out. But I just love this enthusiasm that is just not dulling. What do you think? I was just with your son, Zach, last night, and I was, we were talking a lot about his business.
David Senra (00:02:41):
It's absolutely ripping. He's super intense and he's just in it right now, right? And then it was like 95% of our conversation. And he's like, all right, I have some things that you should talk to my dad about. And then it was so good. I was like, shit, he just did the outline better than me. So one of the things, he's like, you need to get on record what motivates him. He's like, it's one of the most fascinating things. He's like, just ask him what motivates him. So what motivates you? You know, it's all just like fun and interesting, and I want to learn.
David Senra (00:03:11):
And it's like a big puzzle to solve and understand. And you think about the impact that technology has on the world. What could be more exciting than to be in the middle of that and to figure it out and to help advance it. And it's an infinite game, right? It never ends. Love to win, hate to lose. And yeah, it's just like the most exciting thing you could do to be in the middle of a business like this and to see it all unfold and play out.
David Senra (00:03:56):
Yeah, that's one of the things. He's like, he's addicted to puzzles. So that's the way you look at it. Yeah, I mean, it's like the curiosity, solving a puzzle, understanding things, and figuring it out. Yeah, that's, you always want to do that. I mean, I would feel unfulfilled if I couldn't figure out a puzzle, a question. So, yeah, there's like a burning desire to understand things and to figure them out.
David Senra (00:04:29):
Puzzles and math have always been important. When did you realize that about yourself? I never really realized it. You just asked me about it. It just, what I did, I just wanted to understand things. And, you know, when I was dealing with physical things, the way I would understand them is to take them apart. It's like, how can you understand something if you don't take it apart? And my parents would get pretty frustrated, you know, taking apart things in the house.
David Senra (00:05:06):
Sometimes I'd put them together. Sometimes they would still work. But it's just the desire to understand things, you know, the curiosity. Yeah, that's just one of your character traits. You have a great story in the book where I think you save up for the Apple II. It was a computer, and it was, you know, relatively expensive, especially I think you were like 12 or something at the time. And then you bring it home and your parents are like, oh, he's going to plug it in and play with it. It's like, no, I immediately took it apart. I needed to understand how it worked. Well, it's like this machine. It's like it does really cool stuff, but how does it work?
David Senra (00:05:39):
It's like, what's inside it? And how do all those things work? And how do they fit together? And why did they put these things versus those things? And, you know, sort of getting down to the essence of it. I had a thought when I was reading your book. You know, time you're taking apart IBM. You know, this is, I'm pretty sure before you were, you're a teenager. So this is before you start Dell officially. But it's, you know, and I didn't know this about IBM. I had to go back and look it up. This is like the most valuable company in the world at the time. It was the first company to ever hit a hundred billion dollar market cap, which also blew my mind.
David Senra (00:06:13):
But you take it apart and you're like, oh, wait, it's just component. This is the biggest company in the world. And this is their product. And if you take it apart, it's just made of components from other companies. And it's just like, it's implied, or at least this is what I was reading through the lines when I'm reading your books. Like, well, I can do the same thing. Like, what are they doing here that I couldn't do? Did you have that thought? Yeah, absolutely. I mean, so it's back to when you open the thing up, you look inside, what's there?
David Senra (00:06:43):
Well, there's chips, right? And there's wires and there's power supplies and disk drives and all these components. It's like, well, where do those things come from? Who makes those? What's inside those? How did they make those? And so you sort of peel the onion, you know, and you understand all the different elements. And, you know, when I originally got the first IBM PC, you know, yeah, probably took it apart before I turned the thing on, you know, just to just to see what's what's inside.
David Senra (00:07:21):
And one of the really cool things back then was that you didn't have these sort of application-specific integrated circuits. They call them ASICs, right? Or these big sort of chips that nobody really knows what's inside except the designers. All the chips were off-the-shelf chips. So you could see, you could sort of understand what the logic flow was and what each chip was supposed to do inside the circuit.
David Senra (00:07:56):
And inside the IBM PC, none of the chips were made by IBM, right? And none of the disk drives were made by IBM. The power supply wasn't made by IBM. And so, you know, I was also interested in the economics of it. It's like, well, what does this chip cost? What does that chip cost? And you sort of add it all up and then you compare it to the cost that they're selling the thing for. And you go, wow, this is, they're really charging an incredible markup for this.
David Senra (00:08:29):
That's an incredible insight to have as a teenager, though. It's like, figure out what the actual cost of the components are and then go look up. And it sounds like what Elon did with rockets. This is like, the Russians won't sell it to me. I'm on the flight back. These are famous stories in all of the books. He's like, well, what is a rocket made of? Like, okay, well, there's a list of components. How much those components cost? What you just said is like, you just kept asking questions like, oh, I'm going to take it apart. It's like, okay, well, this is all the components. This is what it is. This is like where you get them from. This is the, look, the company names right here.
David Senra (00:08:59):
I can just call them up and find out how much this is. Well, you could go to the distributors and you'd say, you know, okay, how much does this chip cost? And they'd say, well, it's this price for 100 of them. Yeah. Right. And you could literally map out the cost of every chip inside the thing. There is a book Ken Griffin, the founder of Citadel, recommends reading called Hardball. The subtitle of that book is, Are You Playing to Play or Are You Playing to Win? It is a book about extreme winners and some of the best operators in business.
David Senra (00:09:32):
There is a line in that book that says, if you have not examined your costs in detail, it is very likely that there exists lurking somewhere in your cost structure a major opportunity to improve your profits, weaken your competitors, and expand your influence. The first move is to drive down your costs faster than your competitors can and use the cost savings to upset their strategies. That sounds like the author was describing Dell. In his autobiography, Michael Dell says that one way that he was. Able to out-compete his better-funded competitor Compact, which is a structural cost advantage.
David Senra (00:10:05):
Compact's operating costs were 36% of revenue compared to Dell's 18% of revenue. More than 40 years later, Dell is thriving and Compact no longer exists. The best operators in business have this in common. They know their business from A to Z and their costs down to the penny. RAMP makes doing this effortless. RAMP gives your business easy to use corporate cards for your entire team, automated expense reporting, and cost control, all on a single platform. Ramp's corporate cards are fully programmable. You can set limits so the spending of your team never gets out of hand.
David Senra (00:10:38):
Most companies only find out about excessive spending after the fact. With RAMP, you can stop it before it happens. Matt Paulson, who listens to this podcast and who's a founder of MarketBeat, recently switched to RAMP, and this is what he said about it. RAMP is the best. The amount of money you will save from unwanted renewals and employees who think company credit card equals buy whatever you want will far exceed the best credit card rewards program. Matt is talking about the importance of cost control. RAMP helps you make this an obsession. Almost all of the top founders and CEOs I know are running their company on RAMP.
David Senra (00:11:10):
Go to ramp.com to learn how they can help your business play to win today. That is ramp.com. Something I don't even know if I've ever verbalized before, but it's in all these biographies that I read. What I feel is it's like, there's just a lot of common sense where they just, the founder tends to just keep asking more questions and just like going to like an act, you just said, I think peeling an onion. It's like, yeah, just like, okay, I got that answer. What's the next one? And then what's the next one? And there's something in human nature where we just like we stop at the first question. But you have this like infinite curiosity that was very obvious from childhood.
David Senra (00:11:45):
And I think based on what we saw on your office, it's obviously still present. But yeah, it's just very fascinating. It's like, it's not rocket science. Just like keep asking questions and collecting information and thinking about the answers that you're getting. Yeah, you want to understand things at a very deep level. And so that's always been a thing for me. Yeah, I think that's what I'm very interested in. It's like if you read the life story of somebody, like I'm very interested in understanding who the person is and like why they're doing what they're doing. And this is the genius line from Charlie Munger.
David Senra (00:12:16):
It was just like, well, if you just, it's way more effective to tie the ideas to the personality that developed them. And the way you tie it to the personality developed them, it's like you read about their life story. You read about their childhood. You read about what their interests were. I love the part in your book I was rereading yesterday where your parents confront you. Okay, you've started Dell in your dorm at the University of Texas and they're just distraught, which is really funny given what's occurred over the next four decades. Like, what are you doing, Michael? You're supposed to be, you're supposed to be, you know, this path to be a doctor.
David Senra (00:12:49):
And I think your mom's crying. She was, yeah. You're very emotional. Yeah. And so you were like, okay. In the book, you said, I caved, okay? Which is very unusual because you have a super strong personality from a young kid. But then the very next page, I can see it in my mind right now. Cold turkey, didn't even look at a computer for 10 days. I tried to take notes in classes. And then I realized, like, no, like, it was like, you were compelled. Like, I thought working in computers was going to be thrilling. I'm going to drop out with $1,000.
David Senra (00:13:21):
I'm going to take on the biggest company in the world. I think the fact that they put all that pressure on me is the thing that caused me to really reflect on it and decide that, no, this is more than a little hobby or a side thing. This is just like, I have to go do this. Do you feel it was all-consuming even at that age? Because at the time, you're like sleeping in the office when you do start. Like, you start, yeah, I know we talked about this last time. It was hilarious where somebody asked you, it's like, well, when you start Dell, like, how many hours did you work?
David Senra (00:13:55):
And you're like, all of them. Yeah, I mean, I wasn't doing anything else. I mean, there wasn't really anything else that was important to me. And so, yeah, it was totally all-consuming and super exciting and wasn't doing anything else. Were you more of like before that, somebody that just focused on one task at a time? I would get pretty obsessed with individual topics and sort of go deep on them.
David Senra (00:14:29):
So, yeah, I wouldn't consider myself, you know, generally interested in a bunch of things. I was like super deep on certain things that excited me or interested me. Is that still the case today? Or is it just basically? It's supposed to be, yeah. Yeah, Zach told me, he's like, he'll call me at like 5 a.m. and he's like, I have an idea. Like, we should do this product or this acquisition or whatever. He's just like, he just can't help himself. And I asked him, I go, what would get him to stop? He's like, you have to kill him.
David Senra (00:15:02):
What made you decide to write the book? You know, we had gone through a whole lot with the going private and buying EMC and VMware. And there had just been so much that happened. I wanted to kind of document it. And it was during COVID. I had some time and started writing the stuff down. And it felt like a logical place to sort of capture everything that had happened.
David Senra (00:15:34):
And, you know, one of the main reasons I wrote it was for our team inside the company because I want them to understand how we think about the business and where it came from. And, you know, as a business grows larger, it's harder to be able to tell the stories directly with everyone. And so it's just a great opportunity to encapsulate all that and share what happened really, the good and the bad, the things that worked well, things that didn't work well.
David Senra (00:16:19):
And, you know, I certainly benefited from reading the stories or hearing the stories of other people and thought it'd be a good idea. I said this on the episode I made about it. It's like a great gift to like future generations of entrepreneurs. I actually think that idea of like having like a singular piece of media, whether it's a book, there's another idea for you for podcasts for people as the company grows to understand like this is the decisions that were made. This is why it was. This is what we've gone through.
David Senra (00:16:51):
Spotify has this. Originally, they did, Gustav is the head of product at Spotify, and he's the actual one that made this. And originally, I talked to them about this. They were just going to do, it was like an eight-part series. It was going to be a private podcast inside the company, which tells the history of Spotify. So if you come in now, you know, 20 years into its existence, it's like, well, what was like a year one in an apartment? You know, we got a server and a closet. And so what they did is they did this beautiful narrative.
David Senra (00:17:21):
And they would also include the people that were important in the early days. Like, you know, some people don't last in the company, but they were really important for two or three, four years. But I listened to the thing like two or three times. And thank God that now it's public. Anybody could just type in Spotify, a product story, I think, is the name of the podcast. I'm like, why don't more companies do this? Like, I'm not an employee, but if I was coming into Dell or any other company now, and I could have, hey, here's eight, you know, eight one-hour episodes, and they say, not just this decision was based, like, why? These are the constraints we were under.
David Senra (00:17:52):
This is what was going on. Exactly. So, you know, if we walk downstairs right below this room where we are, there's a new class of small business salespeople being trained. Okay. And you would love for those team members to be able to understand, okay, how did we get here? What are all the things that we did right and wrong? And to really deeply understand the culture, the values, the beliefs, and then to be able to build on that with their own contributions.
David Senra (00:18:26):
Yeah. Kind of bring them up to speed. And it's just the context. I also think there's an additional benefit for it to make it public-facing because humans buy stories. Money flows as a function of stories. And I've experienced this. It's like, if I read, I spend, you know, 40 hours reading about this person that had this idea in their head. They built a company. At the end of that, you're going to have a way better appreciation. I find up buying their products that I never even would have thought of because now I understand the story. I just reread James Dyson's autobiography, which is one of my favorite books, probably my number one recommendation out of the 400 books I've read so far, just because it's like 90% just struggle.
David Senra (00:19:05):
The first autobiography is just like, I've been family for 14 years. This guy is like a mule. He won't give up. 5,127 prototypes, but there's an idea in the book that I thought was smart where he understood the power of storytelling. Okay. And so he's like, you're going to walk into the retailer. You're going to see six different vacuum cleaners. His obviously is designed different, so it's going to catch your eye. But he insisted they wrote like a 200-word story on like a little flyer, right? Maybe like a little piece of cardboard and you could attach it to the handle of the vacuum cleaner.
David Senra (00:19:36):
And what happens? If that person, humans are attracted to stories, they're attracted to people, right? And so they'd read that, and then it would increase their sales because they understood who's behind this. Why did they make it? How is it different? Like it was a very effective sales tool. So I think like doing podcasts like this, books, anything like this where you can actually tell like why you're doing what you're doing. This is the crazy thing. I've heard from, I don't know, I've probably got thousands of messages about the episode I did on you. And the most common thing was I knew the name.
David Senra (00:20:09):
I had no idea. Everybody knows Dell. The brand name, right? But they didn't understand just how crazy your story and the multiple different transformations you've had to make over 41 years. And now they're like, oh, this guy, like, I'm so glad you put that in front of me. I think it's like a super important idea. It's all been a lot of fun. And still is. And it feels like we're just getting started, actually, when I think about the business and the opportunities we have. And yeah, it's all fun.
David Senra (00:20:43):
You mentioned earlier that you benefited from studying people that came before you. And this is, you know, you wanted to pass that forward. Like, who are a few of the people that you study, you felt you learn from, or that influence like your thinking about how you're building, how you build your business? You know, when I was a kid, you would read about entrepreneurs that were starting companies, Charles Schwab or Fred Smith, certainly Sam Walton, some of the early telecom pioneers, people that were doing it right then, like in the 70s.
David Senra (00:21:22):
And those stories were just super interesting to me. And I grew up in Houston, which was kind of a boom town. You'd see these new companies being created and parents were talking about that. And so those stories were always just interesting and compelling. And you want to understand, well, how did they do that? And why did they do that? And what happened? And I never imagined myself doing anything else other than starting a business.
David Senra (00:21:56):
The idea just was in my consciousness from a very early age. This great line that Jeff Bezos says, where he's like, our passion, we don't choose our passions. Our passion shoots us. I think there's multiple, like my notes to myself in the margins. Like, oh, he's compelled. He's like, this is coming through him. Like, he's like, he has no choice. This is going to happen. But is there anybody in particular that you like really honed in on and admired and tried to emulate in some way? I always think you can learn from just about anybody, whether they succeeded or failed.
David Senra (00:22:31):
And so I tried to just understand as many people as I could that were entrepreneurs that were starting businesses. How did they struggle? What worked? What didn't work? And those were always the compelling and interesting stories. When you were 15, you met, you were, I think, at some kind of conference with, and this is the first time you ever were in the presence of Steve Jobs. I think Steve was like 25 at the time. So was he somebody, like when you saw him at 15 and you saw, okay, wait, this is a young kid in his 20s building a computer company.
David Senra (00:23:08):
Was like that a model for you? Or what was your interpretation of like that experience? I guess what I'm trying to get at. Yeah, so, you know, in the early days of the computer industry, as I knew it, the microprocessor-based computer industry, you know, Apple was a leading company and Steve was obviously the sort of legendary figure. So I was in this Apple user group, which was a bunch of, you know, geeky people. It was like get together and you don't. You don't say.
David Senra (00:23:39):
Exactly. And, you know, sort of compare how they had souped up their computers and software they had written and learned from each other. And so, you know, Steve came to speak to our user group. And yeah, I mean, he, you know, he was like using these incredible, you know, metaphors and they were like listening to him and looking at what Apple's doing and going, wow, that's really cool.
David Senra (00:24:15):
And, you know, you'd also started hearing about Bill Gates, you know, who's also about the same age as Jobs. And, you know, they're both about 10 years older than I am. And you kind of look at them and go, well, okay, they did something cool. Maybe I've got a shot. Yeah. That's really cool. There was something you mentioned to me when we had dinner that has been rattling around in my head. And I think it's probably the reason that I couldn't sleep.
David Senra (00:24:45):
And I don't even think it was like explicit advice. I think you were just making an observation. But you said something along the lines that, you know, you've seen countless different companies and entrepreneurs come and go over four decades, four plus decades. And you said something that terrified me unintentionally, that most of the entrepreneurs, most entrepreneurs and founders that you've known were never taken out by competition, that they sabotaged themselves.
David Senra (00:25:16):
Can you say a little bit about that? Yeah, I mean, I think you could make the argument that they made mistakes along the way that were fatal. And ultimately, the companies didn't succeed. But it's all of their own doing, right? You have to make the right choices in order to continue on and survive and ultimately thrive.
David Senra (00:25:46):
What do you think are some of the causes of mistakes? You have obviously smart, talented, competitive people, right? Charlie Munger has this great line where it's like intelligent people are taken up by three things, ladies, liquor, and leverage. So like, have you seen any common like causes for somebody to sabotage themselves or to not live up to what they should have? Charlie's right about those three things. You know, we stay away from those. I sort of go back to understanding things and curiosity.
David Senra (00:26:19):
And it's like you've got to know why something is working or not working. And if you're in the middle of a super competitive endeavor and you don't really completely understand what's going on, well, you're going to make mistakes, right? And so, you know, when I look at the competitors that are no longer around, yeah, they, you know, had either overzealously expanded or made, you know, design, you know, errors or they failed to understand the competitive landscape.
David Senra (00:27:11):
I mean, there's lots of ways to fail, right? You have a great example of one in the book with Adam Osborne, where he had a very successful, I think the Osborne one was relatively successful, right? Yeah. Okay. Yeah. And he's like, all right, now we're coming up with Osborne II. It's even new and improved and it's great. And you make the point. It's just like, yeah, maybe, but it didn't ship in time. And so now you just made this big announcement. We're like, we have this great new product. It's even better than one. What are you telling to the market? The Osborne effect. I don't think people talk about it so much anymore, but back then, the Osborne effect was a thing where you introduce a new product that's better than your first product and nobody buys your first product anymore and you're out of business.
David Senra (00:27:52):
And so, you know, yeah, don't want to do that. So go make some mistakes nobody's ever made before. Try to make them in small increments. Fix your mistakes as fast as you find them. And you actually want to make mistakes. You just want to make them small and, you know, iterate and fix them quickly. I mean, one of the things when you're creating a new business in an area that has never been done or with some new technology, new business model, there's no playbook.
David Senra (00:28:26):
There's no like book you can read. It says, here's how you do it, right? And if you hire the people from the adjacent industry companies and ask them to go do it, well, they're just going to go do what they were doing before, right? And so that's not going to work. So you need a lot of creativity and you need to sort of intuit your way to the answer by experimenting. It's like, okay, here's a theory that we think will work.
David Senra (00:28:58):
Let's try it. Right. And, you know, does it work? Great. Okay. Let's do 2x that. Okay. Let's do 10x that. Let's do 100x that. Doesn't work. Okay. Let's stop, you know, restart, come up with another theory and just keep experimenting until you find the answer. You're kind of going through that now. In fact, I want to read something that you said that was one of the most interesting things. You said it on a podcast. And you made this, essentially talked to your entire company. And you said, I'm just going to read this quote. I stood up and told the company that five years from now, I love this so much.
David Senra (00:29:31):
I stood up and told the company that five years from now, we will have a new competitor. And that new competitor is going to be in every business that we are in, except they're going to be faster, more efficient, and more capable. And they're going to put us out of business. And the only way that we're going to prevent that is we are going to become that company. It's gut-wrenching stuff to reinvent and reimagine your business. But if you don't do it, you go out of business. Yeah, exactly. So, you know, when. Chat GPT came out in November of 22 or so looking at this and going, wow, this is a big deal.
David Senra (00:30:07):
This is pretty interesting. And you started to see the rate of improvement in the LLMs. And in technology, you can sort of look at the rate of improvement in the learning curve and you can sort of plot, well, where's this thing going, right? Where's it going to be in a year, two years, or three years? And you look at, okay, we're going to have agents and multi-agent systems, and we're going to be able to reason over incredible amounts of information.
David Senra (00:30:40):
Well, what does that actually mean for the way knowledge work gets done and the tools that humans are going to have? So you think about that, you go, wow, this is a big, big deal here. We need to totally reset how we're thinking about the business and reimagine it, reframe it, and understand what the processes are going to look like in five years. And so you do all that and you say, if we keep doing what we were doing before, we're going to be in serious trouble because some new company is going to come along and yeah, they're going to have all these new tools.
David Senra (00:31:22):
They're not going to have this legacy of crap from the past, right? And old ways of doing things. And they're just going to do it the new way. And so we have to change or we're going to go out of business. You know, I also believe in this idea that if you don't have a crisis, make one, right? You get people excited, motivated, and to drive the necessary change.
David Senra (00:31:55):
I mean, in one sense, this is not a technology problem. The technology is there, whether you use it or not. It's a question of how do you organize the team and people to actually go and get this thing done. How do you motivate them? How do you give them the right tools? How do you structure the ways people work together so that you can do it quickly?
David Senra (00:32:27):
And it's very hard for people to, you know, if you've been doing something for 10 years or 20 years or 30 years the same way and all of a sudden it's like some new thing comes along. You're like, no, I don't want to do that. You know, people don't like to change. But you have to. And so that's what we've been doing. Yeah, this is excessively rare. I mean, think about the story in the book where I think the line that I summarized where you were saying about IBM's like, yeah, the personal computer is, you know, fine. It's going to be a great terminal for the mainframe. And it's just like, oh, you see this over and over again in these biographies if you're studying something that's occurring over multiple decades.
David Senra (00:33:02):
It's like companies and people cannot envision a future that's different from the present that they succeeded in. So they just kind of like dismiss it or kind of ignore it. I'm trying to think though, like, so you just said, okay, there's no books, like what you guys are doing right now, Dell, right? You can't, just like, you're on the cutting edge. So there's no books you can read about it. But you have surfed how many different technological revolutions you did, the microprocessor, right? Your microcomputer, sorry. The personal computer.
David Senra (00:33:33):
Then obviously the internet was invented. Client server technology a little bit before you. How many? So I got four or five. How many have you successfully navigated and had to reinvent Dell over and over again? How many of these huge shifts do you think you've never done? Yeah, there's probably been six or seven of them. So if you've done that six or seven times, and then I think in the book, you know, obviously you say, we did really great on this one, not good on this one, but we've tried to fix that. You're not going to be perfect over that many decades. But do you see like, is there like an echo between all of these, like that you can apply like certain ideas you could take away and like form a structure?
David Senra (00:34:10):
It's like, oh, that's kind of similar to what we had to do when we had to reinvent for X. Yeah, there are, although the time frames that these things occur tend to be shrinking. Say more about that. So if you think about the internet, you know, when first you had the internet, you had the World Wide Web, right? And websites started popping up in the mid-90s. And then, you know, but it took like a decade before there was really a boom in things like e-commerce.
David Senra (00:34:43):
And I mean, it was going on in the late 90s and early 2000s, but it really didn't, it took a long, long time. So now maybe it's like five to ten times faster. You know, if you look at the growth in the usage of these tools. And part of it is that each successive wave of technological improvement is built on the prior foundations.
David Senra (00:35:13):
And so they're able to go faster. So if you have 5 billion people connected with all kinds of devices, well, now they can use these tools and that just goes way faster. I think you have to have this idea in your head that any new thing has some chance of succeeding, right? And say more about that. So there's a lot of wild ideas out there. And if you dismiss them all, you're going to miss some things.
David Senra (00:35:46):
So you kind of have to hold this idea in your head that any of these wild ideas has a chance of succeeding. And let's sort of understand what do all these things mean and figure out what is the point of intersection, right? You know, what should we be doing about this? And when is it actually relevant, interesting, valuable, and it sort of hits escape velocity.
David Senra (00:36:19):
And if you're sort of stuck in a particular paradigm or you're like dismissing things, you're going to miss them. Yeah. And so, you know, you need to be open-minded enough to consider all possibilities. But your ability to do that is so counter to human nature because we're habitual, like we're habitual creatures. You know, it's like, oh, I found what I want or I found like what I like to do and like this is the best.
David Senra (00:36:49):
You know, like if you look at like what people, what music people listen to, for example, it's like music you listen to when you're like high school and college and maybe you've added a couple, but like you're kind of like just stuck on that where you are just like completely open, maybe addicted to, you know, new technology and new ways to think about or new ways to solve like old problems. Yeah, I love, I love the stuff. But how do you not squash new ideas? Like you just said, like, you know, there's a great line. It's like any idea can work now. Everybody's connected and they can grow faster than you can possibly imagine.
David Senra (00:37:21):
So how do you like, do you have a process for like, how do you not, you know, new ideas are fragile and they need some kind of protection and some time to grow, like, but most people just like kind of snuff them out or dismiss them immediately. Well, you know, sometimes it's a good idea, but it's the wrong time. Sometimes it's a good idea, but it's the wrong company. Sometimes it's just a bad idea, right? And so, but there's no absolutes here, right?
David Senra (00:37:52):
You just have to be open-minded and consider the possibility that things are changing fast enough that some new thing comes along. If you took the top computer scientists and researchers in AI or just broadly, you know, five years ago and you said, okay, you know, this is what's going to happen with LLMs in the next five years, probably 99 out of 100 would say, no, no, that's not going to happen.
David Senra (00:38:28):
Right. And so that's a pretty good example in contemporary period, you know, where you just need to be open to the possibility that things are going to change. And there's also this thing where about every 10 years or so, something comes along and just completely expands the opportunity set for the industry. And that's part of the fun, the excitement, the super interesting aspect of what we get to do every day.
David Senra (00:39:05):
The best leaders in business are able to spot patterns, but you can't spot patterns if you can't see your data. And most businesses are only using 20% of their data because 80% of your customer intelligence is invisible, hidden in emails, transcripts, and conversations. Unless you have HubSpot. HubSpot is where all of your data comes together so you can see the patterns that matter. Because when you know more, you grow more. And that is a pattern that never fails. Visit hubspot.com today. That is hubspot.com. I just had a thought listening to you speak tied to something else that you said earlier.
David Senra (00:39:39):
It's like basically humans inability to have accurate predictive behavior, predictions about the future. It's kind of tied to the importance of iterating and make sure you're doing a lot of experiments and then having that like tight feedback loop to constantly like get information. Oh, that didn't work. Okay, we ran experiment didn't work. Let's try it a different way. Like those two, like those two things work really well together. It's like we're not going to. Predict the future, we're going to create the future through iteration. Yeah, and it's okay to try to predict it as well. It's just really hard to do.
David Senra (00:40:11):
And you might want to have a lot of experiments. I mean, if you go back and say, okay, let's say you had somebody who was supposed to be really smart or supposed to be an expert or something, right? 10 years ago, how good were they at predicting what was going to happen? Not very good. So don't rely too much on that, right? This is why I think entrepreneurs have to study past entrepreneurs too. And it's like obviously very valuable.
David Senra (00:40:42):
It's no surprise that you were reading about these people. I would always say it's like the greats all studied the greats. This is like very, like they were doing it today. They were doing it 40 years ago. They were doing it 200 years ago. If you took like an average person in normal society and the way they think about experts, okay, and the way it's discussed in all these biographies, it's like they're very dismissive of experts, right? I just mentioned I was reading James Dyson's autobiography. The whole thing is just like he believes in the Edisonian principle of design, just constant iteration. You learn as you go. You can't predict. You just change one thing and then test it and see how it goes.
David Senra (00:41:16):
And he mentions setting Henry Ford a lot in that book. And then James Dyson wrote an autobiography 30 years after that that he also mentions Henry Ford a lot. And the reason I thought of that is because as you were speaking about, you go and ask an expert from 10 years ago, what's going to happen? They're not going to tell you that ChatGPT is absolutely, you know, that my 13-year-old, I use ChatGPT all the time, but I'm a nerd. I like to research stuff. I like to read about stuff. She uses like a therapist, a shopper, a friend. Like it's an entire ecosystem. There's no way you can predict that.
David Senra (00:41:47):
So there's a great line in Henry Ford's autobiography, which was written 120 years ago. This is not a new phenomenon. Human nature does not change. History doesn't repeat human nature does. And he says, if I ever want to sabotage my competition, I would fill their ranks with experts. Experts tend to know so much, and they're so convinced that they're right, they'd get no work done. Yeah, at the limit, nobody knows anything, right? And it's not a bad philosophy when you're thinking about the future.
David Senra (00:42:20):
It's good to have a hypothesis, though, right? And ideas and experiments and to keep an open mind. So what was when we go back to that, hey, they're coming for us. They're going to be faster, more efficient, more capable, and they're going to put us out of business. And we're not going to let that happen because we're going to transform. We are going to be that business. Right. What was your hypothesis back then? Do you remember? Oh, it's pretty simple. It's that it will be possible to dramatically improve the way we do things in all the core processes of the business, from software development to support to sales to every major function, our supply chain.
David Senra (00:43:05):
Everything can be improved in a dramatic way. And that's what we're doing. And we're finding, you know, as we take our data, as we reimagine the processes and simplify and standardize them, we can make them way more effective. So, you know, an example would be in support. We have incredible amounts of data. We have telemetry data that the machines are giving us all the time, right?
David Senra (00:43:38):
About, you know, soft errors and all these things that are going on, you know, inside the usage patterns from customers. We have warranty data. You know, we have previous call logs. We have all these knowledge bases. We have JIRA databases. It's like millions and millions of documents. No human could ever interpret all this. And so we created this tool called Next Best Action, which takes all this data and understands what problem the customer is trying to solve.
David Senra (00:44:11):
And it helps either the customer or the agent that's trying to help the customer get to exactly the best way to solve that problem in the fewest possible steps. And so the person helping them feels like, wow, I'm way better at my job than I used to be because now I got this genius on my shoulders telling me exactly how to solve this problem. The customer's way happier. The problem's solved way faster. And the tool summarizes the call.
David Senra (00:44:41):
So that saves a ton of time. And so everything gets way better. So you can take that same example and, you know, software development with coding assistance. Our sales teams have access to incredible tools. And so we're doing this all over our business. And of course, our customers are doing it. And what is this doing? It's unlocking the power of data using compute and using all these models, which also happens to be, you know, we're in the business of compute and storage and networking.
David Senra (00:45:14):
So it's an enormous opportunity for Dell itself to be able to help all of our customers unlock the power of their data. You couldn't predict the actual tools that were going to be invented. You just knew that now we have this new, there's this new technology that will transform every single process inside the business. We won't be able to predict all the tools, but we just know that they're coming. If we didn't do that and our competitors did, we'd be finished.
David Senra (00:45:47):
And so we're not going to do that. And even if we did it and our competitors did it, let's say it just neutralizes. You have to do it. You have no choice. Yeah, there's a line in Andrew Carnegie's biography. It was really fascinating because he dabbled in a bunch of different businesses. He was pretty wealthy before he started the steel company. But once he realized that, think about how important steel was at that time. It's like everything, this is the new, the new product that every other product is going to be made out of, from bridges to roads and everything else.
David Senra (00:46:22):
Like, this is the biggest opportunity of my life. I'm going to go all in on it to the point where he didn't even want any distractions. He sold all of his stocks because he didn't want to find himself looking at the newspaper to wonder like what the price of the stock was. Like fully focused on the greatest opportunity of my entire life. He went into an existing business that was run by older gentlemen, right? He had this new way to do steel. I think it's Bessemer Steel that he got from England. So he took an idea from England and imported it into America, which it's kind of weird how often that is in the history of entrepreneurship, where it's like, oh, this idea is working in one geography. Will it work over there? It's like, yeah, because humans are kind of the same everywhere.
David Senra (00:46:54):
There's some cultural differences, but our core motivations are very similar. And they were very resistant to change. So they're like, no, that's not the best process. And then they would ridicule him for investing in the newest technology. He was spending a ton of money. Every time there was a better machine, a more efficient machine, he would immediately rip out the old machine and input and put in the new technology of his day. We wouldn't think about his technology today. It's definitely technology back then.
David Senra (00:47:25):
And when you read his autobiography, which is in the public domain, anybody could read it for free. It's an incredible gift to humanity. I remember getting to this part of the biography, which is exactly what you just said. It's like, okay, even if this isn't giving us an advantage over our competitors, if we don't do it, like they will have the advantage. So even if we're on like on the same level, and the summary of what Andrew Carnegie was saying, these guys wind up not adopting the technology and they went out of business. So he says, invest in, this is not a direct quote, this is me summarizing his idea. It says invest in technology.
David Senra (00:47:57):
The savings compound. It gives you an advantage over your store removing competitors and it can be the difference between a profit and a loss. If he didn't do that, the investment into the new technology that his competitors were dismissing, the stupid young kid with his fancy machine, right? That wind up making his company profitable in a year or two and their company unprofitable. And then slowly and slowly, they just, they kept losing money and then they went out of business. It's very fascinating how these like themes just keep reappearing. Yeah, exactly. You don't necessarily want everybody to know what you're doing.
David Senra (00:48:29):
Also. The maximum I have from this, I use on the podcast all the time is that bad boys move in silence. And so you mentioned earlier that there's no, sometimes there's no book. You're on the cutting edge. And so I remember there's this great line in this biography of Steve called Becoming Steve Jobs, which I actually think is the best biography written about him. And Steve's like, I don't even know what the business model of animation is. And they start partnering with Disney. And he has this great line. He goes, you can't go to the library and check out a book called the Business Model of Animation. Because there's only one company that's ever done it well.
David Senra (00:49:01):
It's Disney, and they don't want anybody else to know how lucrative it is. One thing that's hilarious that your son Zach wanted me to ask about was what he calls dad terminal. Yeah, so dad terminal is what he refers to as when he kind of taps in and wants to talk about a particular topic or has a has a question. And it's one of my favorite times with Zach, you know, because we're talking about solving problems or challenges inside his business.
David Senra (00:49:42):
And, you know, I get to share the mistakes I made, mistakes I saw other people make, lessons learned, and hopefully save him some pain and suffering and, you know, steps from. You know, learnings along the way. Yeah, he says, instead of typing in the re, I was like, why is it called? I was like, why is it called dad terminal? I didn't understand what that was.
David Senra (00:50:12):
And he's like, well, Bloomberg Terminal. He's like, you know, exactly. Yeah. Yeah. He's like, you subscribe, you log in, and you have a question, and then like you type in, you get this really advanced answer. He's like, I don't use Bloomberg. I use Boomeral. I use Dad Terminal. Yeah. I was like, give me an example. Like, what is, what's the last query at your dad terminal? And he goes, supply chain. He said it like, it was like obvious. I was like, I don't have a supply chain. I run a podcast. I read books. Like, explain it to me. He's just like, there's a handful of things. I have a handful. He's like, there's a bunch of things my dad is world class at.
David Senra (00:50:44):
And he's just like, one of them is the supply chain. And I'm curious as why you think why other people describe you as really good at that. Is that is supply chain just related back to how we started this discussion? It's just like another puzzle for you to like direct your curiosity to. It's definitely an important puzzle and a critical puzzle. I mean, I think if we had not figured out how to do our supply chain well, we would not be here today.
David Senra (00:51:20):
It's as simple as that. So it's a fundamental thing that is just super important in our business. So it's just you've thought more about this area over and made and made a ton of mistakes and learned a ton of lessons and sort of figured out what works and what doesn't work. Yeah, there's a line in the book. I think the first time you realized, hey, I don't like these. Your whole thing is eliminating middlemen and like getting as close to the source as possible.
David Senra (00:51:55):
And I think you're like, you might be 20 years old at the time, but you're taking your first trip to China, if I'm not mistaken. Well, so that would have been 1985. It really wasn't, you couldn't really go into mainland China at that point. There was nothing really to do there. They weren't making anything. So you were going to Asia. You're going to Asia. So yeah, I went to I went to Japan, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and South Korea.
David Senra (00:52:25):
Yeah, but what I love is just like how excited you were. Oh, yeah. Because it's like, it's something you said earlier. It's like you got a deep love for your business. And then now you get to keep peeling back the onion and getting closer and closer. Now it's like, oh, I'm like spending 16 hours a day. I'm sleeping in my office. I'm working. We have customers. We have how we're hiring employees. We have revenue growth. But now I'm getting like deeper and deeper, deeper understanding. And like, so as I read these biographies of people, I try to like build like, you know, I think I have a good sense of like how you think and like what's important to you.
David Senra (00:52:58):
And what I realized is like that instinct that you had as a 20-year-old man or however old you were at that time. It's like that has not never been alleviated. It's just like this constant like keep going lower and lower and lower to like seek more a deeper understanding of like the world around you, but also how your business like fits in that world and how you can build technology to like enhance everybody else around you. Yeah, of course. I mean, that's what you're supposed to do, right? You're supposed to understand things, right?
David Senra (00:53:29):
You say, of course. Like, this is the fun. This is another thing I told you when we had dinner. How else would you do it? I don't know. But to you, I don't understand. This is why I think writing the book and having conversations like this is important because there's so much shit in your head that is so unusual. And it's so valuable, like getting it out and putting it out into the world. Because I remember... I wouldn't know any other way to do it. I know, because you don't understand how abnormal you are. So we were halfway through our dinner, I looked at you and I was like, dude, I have this paradox in my head that I cannot reconcile between like the crazy career that you've had.
David Senra (00:54:07):
It's just like I study uncommon people for a living. You are uncommon amongst uncommon people, right? You have this. So the paradox I couldn't reconcile was between this crazy ride that you had that's described beautifully in your book, this four decade, you know, mission that you've, that you've been on that you've relentlessly given a lot of your life energy to, and just how normal you are. Like you're like, not, I'm talking about like your affectation, your personality, like you're very polite and calm and measured. But it's just like, you understand how rare this is.
David Senra (00:54:41):
No, I know, because you're like, of course you would. Like, this is what I love. It's like, just wake up every day and go do the thing. This is why you're great. But that's, that's why you're great. So like, seems pretty normal to me. There's nobody that reads this book. I'm like, this guy's normal. No, it's not at all. So there's what I love about this, and this is why it's so important because, and I mentioned this on the episode I made on you, but there's this engineer turn and turn founder, Sidney Harmon.
David Senra (00:55:12):
You know the company Harmon Cardin? Yeah, sure. Yeah. So he has a great line. He said that the founder is the guardian of the company's soul, that it's impossible to separate, you know, the creation from the creator. And I think over time, like the... I resemble that. God damn right you do. This is also, again, how abnormal you are. I used to say, it's like, you need to build a business that's authentic to you. And then in this book, Lee was, you know, talking about he was only able to last four years, I think.
David Senra (00:55:44):
And he's just like, you know, we're fighting IBM. We don't have any money. And he's like, my back's hurting. I'm losing my hair. Like, I can't sleep. And he's just like, Michael's ecstatic. He's like tap dancing to the office every day. And he said a line that changed, like, really made me think about things. He's like, he built a business that was natural to him. Of course, it's not abnormal to you because you built a business that's natural to you. Yeah. And if you've been doing it every day for 41 years, it seems pretty normal, right?
David Senra (00:56:18):
On the last episode during my conversation with Daniel Eck, he said one of the most important ideas that I've heard. He said, I'm not obsessed about time. I'm obsessed about energy management. If you have time, but you have no energy, you're not going to accomplish anything anyways. I signed up for function long before they were a sponsor of this podcast. And when you sign up, they ask you what your health goals are. And my response in all caps was maximum energy. All of the founders, CEOs, and extreme winners I have studied have excessively high energy levels.
David Senra (00:56:49):
If you're going to be the best at what you do, you need to maximize your energy and output. And that is why I've partnered with Function. Function provides access to comprehensive blood tests and other lab testing to help you improve your health so you can perform at your highest level. Function has made it easy for me to monitor and improve my internal health markers so that I feel at my absolute strongest. As a member of function, you get access to test over 100 of your biomarkers from hormones to toxins to markers of heart health, inflammation, and stress. Function gives you a straightforward analysis of all your results along with advice from expert doctors on how to improve things like your testosterone, your stress hormones, how to reduce toxins in your body and much more.
David Senra (00:57:29):
The platform is absolutely beautiful and provides an easy to understand picture of your overall health. Once you try function, you'll immediately understand why it's the fastest growing health platform in the country. To learn more about function and to join, go to functionhealth.com forward slash CENRA. Right now, Function is offering $100 credit to the first thousand people who sign up for a function membership to get this $100 credit. Just visit functionhealth.com forward slash CENRA. Again, that's functionhealth.com forward slash CERA. Lee Walker, tell me how important that was, finding a person, because you were relatively persistent in recruiting him.
David Senra (00:58:06):
And you were like 21, I think at the time. 21, yeah. And he was 45 or something like that. Like, what's the role that you feel he played at that point in Dell's history? Well, yeah, the company was, I mean, it's like our rocket had sort of taken off, but, you know, it was pretty fragile. And, you know, we had some good ideas, but there was a lot of missing pieces. And Lee helped fill in those missing pieces and sort of organize the uncontrolled chaos and helped us sort of really, you know, scale up the business.
David Senra (00:58:52):
And like operations, like, what do you think? Yeah, I mean, it was, well, first of all, we were growing so fast, we just, we just didn't have the balance sheet or the capital to support our growth. And so he helped us, you know, get some credit lines and, you know, that, you know, freed up capital and then like, you know, sort of organized some, you know, some of the operations and stuff I didn't really know about or have a great interest in, you know, because it wasn't the technology or the customers.
David Senra (00:59:32):
Yeah. And so he helped sort of get all that stuff on the right path. And then as we, as we needed even more capital, you know, with a private placement and going public, you know, he helped help sort of get all that going. And, you know, just basically, how do you, how do you scale this thing up to get it ready for 10x or 100x growth? One thing I thought was very fascinating that Lee Walker said, right, is you got. To the point where you had that negative cash conversion cycle where but you were selling to like individuals.
David Senra (01:00:04):
So individuals are like, oh, I want a computer, Michael. Okay, give me your credit card. You're like, great, I got this money, which we'll talk about in a minute. But now you've moved up and now you're doing enterprise. And some of these companies are huge, like Texaco, like these giant companies. And I remember at one point in the book, it was something you were doing like 60 million a year in revenue and you had like 200 grand of your bank accounts or something. It's like, there's just no cash there. And what was smart is he went to the banks. And I was curious, it sounds like he had relationships with the bankers. And I always have this maxim that relationships run.
David Senra (01:00:36):
He did. Okay. So relationships are on the world. You see that over and over again. And so Lee had relationships with these bankers that I assumed in the book and you just verified. But then what I thought he did was really smart. They're like, listen, we trust you, Lee, but we don't know this kid. And his whole point is like, you don't have to even trust me or the kid. He's like, look at all the purchase orders. Like, do you think Texaco is going to pay us or not? And using the brand and the prestige and the, you know, essentially the value. Like, Texaco's not going out of business.
David Senra (01:01:08):
They're going to pay them. Pay this kid that you say you don't know. Lend us against our receivables. I was like, yeah, it's a really good idea. Yeah, it was receivable-based financing. The problem was that, you know, as a 21-year-old, you know, starting a business with really no capital infusion from the beginning, $1,000, right? A banker looking at it with no one known inside the business to trust would sort of their general reaction would be, I think I'll go do something else, right?
David Senra (01:01:49):
But, you know, Lee had those relationships. He was trusted. And he was able to kind of explain it to them. And, you know, that helped sort of break open that log jam. And that, you know, gave us some of the capital we needed to continue to grow and expand. So can you explain how you stumbled upon the negative cash conversion cycle and why that was so powerful? Yeah, so we didn't have any capital, right? And so, you know, what we figured out was that if we could dramatically shrink our inventory and get paid from our customers faster and maybe not pay our suppliers, you know, instantly, pay them a little bit later.
David Senra (01:02:41):
Then if you're growing and you have a negative cash conversion cycle, you actually generate a lot of cash. And so you don't need as much capital to raise to be able to grow the company. You have a high return on capital. And so we started looking at the business that way. And of course, we also, there was this really interesting thing where our competitors who didn't really understand what we were doing, they had these elongated supply chains. They had distributors and dealers.
David Senra (01:03:14):
And so they would have, you know, like 90 days of collective inventory from the time that they actually made the product to when it actually got to the customer. And you could actually understand this because if you opened up the computers, the chips had dates on them that showed the weeks they were made. Whoa. So, you know, it would say like 4292. And that meant that chip was built in the 42nd week of the 92nd year.
David Senra (01:03:51):
And so you could literally date how old the inventory was by opening these things up. But anyway, so they had like 90 days in their collective supply chain. And we figured out how to have like five days. I mean, it was crazy. It was like, it was like a massive advantage. Now, the other reason this is important is because it turns out that the price of electronic components generally goes down, right? And, you know, it's a pretty predictable thing.
David Senra (01:04:24):
And so if our components are five days old and the competitors' components are 90 days old, well, theirs costs a lot more than ours do, right? And so now you've got this structural competitive advantage. Now, another element of this is that you also have the freshest and the newest and the best technology. You're not selling the 90-day old fish or bananas, right? You're selling the new chip, the latest capability.
David Senra (01:04:59):
And so now you've got even another advantage, right? And so, and then you've got this feedback loop because you're getting signal from the customers of, oh, I like this, I want that, change this. And so you're able to, you know, create this dynamic feedback loop. So that was what we created and it worked, you know, and we kept iterating it and evolving it. The competitors, you know, they kind of dismissed it.
David Senra (01:05:30):
And one of the best things was they just didn't understand it. They like misunderstood it, which was fantastic. How is that? So it's like you don't want them to understand what's going on. You don't want to explain it. But how do you explain their inability to? Now you can explain it. But back then, you don't want to, you don't want them to know what's happening. You just want them to maybe not even see what's going on.
David Senra (01:06:00):
So I have a funny story about this. And then I'm going to get back to Compact and IBM. So I had dinner with one of the wealthiest people in the world. He's 76 years old. He's been in the family business. He's the second generation of this privately held dynasty. And he started working the business since he was six. And it was like crazy stories. It started on the shipping. They owned one of the largest privately held shipping companies in the world. And he's this racant tour. He's like super charismatic. And just like, it was an incredible dinner. But I had found out, same reason when you're like, hey, I'm writing this book because I want people to come to Dell to understand the history.
David Senra (01:06:37):
They had commissioned, the family had commissioned a real author, right? I have some of these books in my house, not from this guy, where these family businesses or these people at brokerage companies, they have, they'll hire, you know, an actual author, pay them whatever, a million dollars, write the book, and then they'll print it just like this, but there'll be no ISBN number on the back because it's not available for sale. So I have a couple of these in my home library that people have given me because of the podcast. But he was telling me the story. He's like, yeah, we commissioned a biography of the patriarch who passed away a long time ago. And then we did one for me.
David Senra (01:07:07):
And I was just like, dude, give me those books. I leaned in. I was like, I want those books. I was like, I'll crush the episodes. The episodes would be great. Because he had so many crazy stories. Without hesitation, he goes, absolutely not. I was like, why? He goes, I have no desire to educate my competitors. So that just nailed it. It's like, obviously, if you have an edge, shut up about it. This is what I don't understand. So maybe IBM and Compaq are the two people, two main companies that are not understanding the advantage that you had at this time, right?
David Senra (01:07:38):
IBM is a big old stodgy company. Okay, that makes somewhat more sense. Compact was run by its founder. How do you think he deliberately misunderstood? Like, how is that possible for him to not be able to accurately analyze? Do you think he was just dismissive of you? You didn't think you were a threat? Like, what was going on there? He's still alive. You can go ask him. I think when you're, you know, you're in a bubble, you know, people tell you things are working and maybe you just don't want to believe that there's alternate information.
David Senra (01:08:14):
And so you dismiss it. Did you read the new biography of Jensen Wong called in a video? Actually, it's a history of NVIDIA, but he's heavily featured in video way. I haven't read the whole thing. Okay. I did an episode on it. I'll send it to you. But he has this whole thing where the threat comes from below. And his, I think he reduces everything to maximum. He's like a really good communicator. And so he's saying he's like, we're going to ship the whole cow because the threat goes from below. And I think I mentioned this in the episode I did on your book where it's just like you at the time came out with a, you just beautifully described like you're just stacking one advantage on another advantage on another advantage.
David Senra (01:08:53):
So you're like, okay, we have the latest technology. We have way better supply chain management than you. We are putting out, I think you put out a computer that outperformed Compaq's, which you sold direct to the consumer for $795, if I remember correctly. It was faster than theirs. And they sold a worst computer for $1,500. And it was only through retail stores. It's like that exact, the manifestation of all these advantages you had. You could just look at the market and be like, it's very curious to me how this founder could be like, hey.
David Senra (01:09:25):
Yeah. And you kind of hope that they don't even see it. Yeah. I mean, I think there's a human instinct to say, hey, look at me. I'm doing this great thing. Isn't this cool? But actually in business, it's better if the competitor doesn't understand or doesn't see you. So because you weren't in stores, the only way they would know that is if they were ordering directly from you. And they probably weren't doing that. Yeah, or if they were sort of paying attention, but you kind of hope they don't notice and don't pay attention.
David Senra (01:09:57):
I think this is tied back to the importance of following. Like your natural star and something you're just obsessed with. Because I didn't know that part where you could take these things and see, oh, this is the 42nd week of the 96th year. That's insane. There's a line in the book. It's not that hard. The numbers are right. Not that hard. The numbers are just sitting there. It's like they're just staring at you. They're talking to you. I 100% agree with you. It's like, but this is the difference between somebody's obsessed and somebody's not. Like, that guy wasn't taking apart computers compulsively.
David Senra (01:10:27):
There's a story in the book. And no disrespect to him. I'm not trying to throw any shade to anybody. There's a story in the book where you guys are doing, I think, the private placement of IPO and Black Friday happens. And I think Lee Walker walks in your office to tell you that, oh, shit, there might be some trouble. There's trouble brewing in the capital markets at this point. And he said, Michael was in his office taking apart another computer. That's what you do. That's what you do.
David Senra (01:10:58):
That's exactly. I think that's the biggest thing, man. It's like, it's an unfair advantage if you can direct your energy at something that you, there's no, we talked about this at dinner. We have a mutual friend and Sam Hinkey. And one of the things that's interesting about Sam is if you analyze who he keeps around him, they have different interests. You know, it's like this podcaster dude, this investor guy, this entrepreneur, this like athlete. And he's like, what, what, what I'm drawn to, what all these people have in common that may not be obvious to you, David, is that there's no end.
David Senra (01:11:29):
Like, you can't get to the end of what they're interested in. You think he used the analogy of like a cup. He's like, you just pour and pour and pour it. It's like it just keeps going. Like they can never get to the end of their curiosity. And I think you're a perfect example of that, where if you look at other founders that are doing things for fame or status or whatever the case is, it's like Jerry Seinfeld has a great line. He goes, if you just do it for the money, you're only going to go so far. Yeah, when it's like a passion or an obsession, there's no end to it.
David Senra (01:12:00):
Yeah. And you're taking our chips and analyzing, like, oh, I have a 90-day advantage over here. And I'm not worried about the capital markets because we're just going to keep serving our customers. And like eventually that is going to change. There's not going to be a depression forever. So what can I focus on? Can I just focus on understanding what I'm working on, what's in front of me, and then following this deep curiosity, and actually taking the curiosity that comes from your head into like an actual product that makes somebody else's life better. It's like the miracle of entrepreneurship. You got it.
David Senra (01:12:31):
So we were just talking about the fact that Compact and IBM, they were almost like essentially you got fuel from being underestimated. You mentioned in the book that like you found it, I think you said something that's like a powerful motivating force. Do you recall why you felt that way? You know, it was just like, okay, wow, this is going to be a multiplier for us because they underestimate us.
David Senra (01:13:02):
They don't understand what we're doing. And so they didn't see us coming because they were underestimating us. I think the CEO of Compaq would refer to us as a mail order company or garage operation or whatever. And you'd hear that and you'd go, oh, wow, this is great. They have no idea what we're doing. All that was motivating.
David Senra (01:13:34):
Anytime, there was sort of a setback and the conventional wisdom or even whatever interpretation was, okay, they're going to fail. They're going to go out of business. All that incredibly motivating. Is it still like that today? Of course. Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. I love how everything is. Of course, of course it is. Yeah. I mean, if it wasn't, I'd probably be dead.
David Senra (01:14:06):
I mean, and still caring about the company even from the grave. It's a common, I think, misconception. I'm curious to get your take on this, where people are like, well, you know, if you don't raise all the money at the beginning and your competitor does, like, you're automatically dead. And I hear that a lot. And I was like, I don't know, like Compact raised $75, $100 million, and you had $1,000 and a dorm room. Do you feel that it is actually different today? Like if you were advising a younger entrepreneur?
David Senra (01:14:40):
I think it's very situation-specific in terms of the company, industry, et cetera. So I don't think you could give generic advice there. Yeah, that's why I think the generic advice is you have to do this or you're dead. I'm like, I don't, I'm pretty sure that's not the case. I don't think, you know, like I was saying, saying earlier, I don't think there are ever these absolutes. I think you always have to hold out the possibility that somebody is going to figure out some clever, interesting way to do something that nobody's ever thought of that is different.
David Senra (01:15:16):
And, you know, that's just going to happen. Yeah, that's actually an interesting area to go down where it's like, who else you figured out by accident? Like, because, you know, necessity is the mother of all inventions. Like, I don't have capital, so how do I get money? Well, I just asked my customers for the money. And then you accidentally discovered all these advantages and had a deeper understanding as you went along. Are there any other examples of like entrepreneurs or businesses that you've studied where it's like, wow, that's like a really clever way to do something effectively inexpensively?
David Senra (01:15:51):
Well, I mean, you think about some of the retailers, you know, like Walmart and Costco and Amazon obviously came up with super clever ways of winning in that space by doing things inexpensively, taking out all kinds of cost. Yeah, the other one that came to mind was Sam's Amurray, the banana king. He essentially, you know, builds the second largest banana empire.
David Senra (01:16:24):
And at the time, then later on overtakes the first largest, which is the United Food Company. But I guess like one thing that he figured out, and he was actually your same age, he was 19 years old. He had no money and he was trying to figure out a product to sell. And so what he did, he's just like, well, I was working the docks down, I think, in Alabama at the time. And he's like, all these fruit companies, they have these things called ripes, which are the bananas that are going to go bad in like two days from now. And they just take them off the boat and throw them in the garbage because they can't get it fast enough to the store. And his idea is like, well, I can use this new technology of the day, which is the railroad.
David Senra (01:16:56):
And I can buy this for almost nothing because they're not getting anything anyways. And I'm going to put their ripes and get on the railroad with it and then sell it at every single stop. And then he was generating so much cash and then he could start working down the line all the way to when he had his own banana plantations. Just like that idea. It's like it starts out with like this little nugget of like, oh, this is like an interesting opportunity. And now understanding as you pull and pull and pull and pull, it gets more and more like you're, you keep stacking these advantages one on top of another. Yeah, I gotta find, I should organize and like look into like more examples of like, is there another example of like what you had at the beginning of Dell?
David Senra (01:17:33):
Because I think that's the key. Like I think some degree, it's like the easier, more path is just go and like sell part of the company or raise more money or find essentially like solve the problem with money where you solve it with like creativity and hustle and like intelligence. Those ideas are like excessively fascinating to me. Ikea is another one where he, you know, same thing, where he was just selling mail order. He's a mail order company. And he has a great line. Yeah, there's that mail order thing again.
David Senra (01:18:05):
I know. I think it's like still vaj, he has that great line where he's like expensive solutions to any problem or signs of mediocrity. So he was like, you have to be more creative. We had this whole thing in the 80s and we called it beat the mail order stigma. Really? And it was sort of like as we were establishing our brand, you know, sort of the conventional wisdom was a mail order company, which was sort of like a pejorative, like an insult.
David Senra (01:18:40):
It's like, okay, it's a mail order company. And it's sort of like a stereotype. It's like, oh, you can dismiss it because it's a mail order company. And all the press, you know, for years, they were like, mail order company Dell, you know, mail order company Dell introduces server. You know, I was like, what? It's like, okay, we have 30,000 patents. When are we not a mail order company? What is this mail order thing? So anyway, we had to get rid of that.
David Senra (01:19:12):
How did you beat it? Just kept doing our thing, you know, and eventually people go, I guess it's not really mail. I mean, it's internet and it's not mail order. I was like, what? Nobody orders stuff in the mail. What is it? I think you just made me realize something that I didn't understand when I read the book when you were talking about how important it is to not squash ideas and that ideas can come from anywhere and they can like, you know, they seem small, but they can have a huge impact. I think Dell was like one of the first companies to sell on the internet, right?
David Senra (01:19:45):
Yeah, well, so we were selling direct, right? You know, like people could call us on the phone and we used to have these rooms with like a gazillion fax machines and they would send us the orders on faxes. It was crazy. And we had catalogs. Right, and so then the World Wide Web comes along, you websites, you know, like, oh, you mean we can create a website and people can go on there and like the catalog is there and they can like press a button and order the thing. That's the coolest thing ever.
David Senra (01:20:15):
We got to do that, right? And so in my first book, you notice on every page at the bottom, it said www.dell.com. I read that other book too. Like obsessed with getting people to the website because it just became like the easy way to interact with people. And that book came out in 97, right? 99. I think 98. Yes. But yeah, we started, we started, you know, with one of the first websites.
David Senra (01:20:50):
I mean, there weren't many websites. I remember when it was a small number. I remember when you could go to all the websites. Like in the whole world. I'm done for the world. There's no more websites. It sounds crazy now, but there used to be not that many websites. You could go to them and like, okay, I'm done. It's just, there's nothing, nothing else to see. That obviously changed quickly. So how the hell do you even build a store? Like you were collecting, do they have to like call a number in? Because I remember like taking credit cards online.
David Senra (01:21:21):
Maybe not 90. If you were doing, do you remember what year you launched the site? 97, probably 96? I think it was probably 96. 95, 96. You built all this stuff. They had to build the whole thing. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. It's funny. I forgot about the fact that Dell.com is on the bottom of every page. But what's fascinating is if you read Bezos' shareholder letters, he never refers to it as Amazon. Every single shareholder letter up until you don't have to do it anymore. And then every single interview, it's amazon.com, amazon.com, amazon.com.
David Senra (01:21:52):
Then it turns into Amazon because you're just like, we've got to push you guys to this new thing called the internet where you can buy things. It's such a fascinating thought, like how novel it was. But you kind of saw it right away. Like, we should just do this because it's cool. We'd experimented with how do you create an electronic version of the catalog, even like we're going to send you a floppy disk or a CD-ROM and you put it in your computer and you load it up and the catalog is there. Yeah. Right? Those are some of the ridiculous things that happened before the internet, before the World Wide Web.
David Senra (01:22:25):
Did you ship that? Yeah, yeah, we did. So you just, kind of like what AO, remember AOL? They just essentially carpet bomb the entire country. Yeah, we didn't do it like that, but ours is more targeted. But you wanted to make it easy for the customer to understand your offerings. And then the World Wide Web just made that, you know, kind of infinitely accessible to anyone. The idea of mailing out a floppy or a disk of a catalog is just like a hilarious idea.
David Senra (01:22:59):
But then people were surprised when people started ordering computers online. And I remember, you know, we sold like a server for $50,000 online. People were like, no way. You know, it's like, it didn't happen as fast as some of the things that are happening now. But obviously, for a business that was selling directly to businesses and, you know, individuals, you know, all over the world, it was just total rocket fuel. How soon into Dell were you starting to sell, like targeting institutions over individuals?
David Senra (01:23:33):
You know, it's really interesting. If you go back to the very, very beginning, like the first full year, like over 80% of the business was to businesses. Okay, so it's sort of like doctors and dentists, right? Or lawyers or some of your first, but they were using it for business purposes. An individual doctor, Dennis, I would think of them as more like an individual. But, well, first of all, let's just level set here. So if you look at all technology spending, roughly 75 to 80% of it is businesses, not consumer.
David Senra (01:24:11):
And so that's kind of been the thing for a long time. So within the first year, you got to similar percentage? Similar percentage, yeah. You know, there were companies, universities, they were buying five, 10, 20, 50 machines at a time. One final thing that I want to talk to you about that I think is like one of the most important ideas in your book, especially when you're trying to like push these stories down the generations.
David Senra (01:24:44):
So I see it in a lot of the biographies. And I think it's like another misconception how we just talked about the misconception machine. Like entrepreneurs know, be wary of experts and like how they can kill new ideas, where like a normal person would revere them, right? So there's like this difference of understanding each other. Another one that I would say is like the importance of ego and self-belief and self-confidence. And my, you know, general society might say, you know, you should generate evidence and then be confident.
David Senra (01:25:14):
And I hear this a lot, which is perplexing to me because in the books, this is no, you have that direct completely backward backwards. Belief comes before ability. And so I would go back to this part in your book that I think is super important when you're 19 years old and your dad's like, what do you want to do with your life? And you're like, I want to compete with IBM. And you'd sit there and like, again, I don't think you should be reading these books quickly. It's just like, there's no test at the end. Like sit with the ideas and really think about what's happening on this page. And I think it's one of the most important pages in the book. I can actually see the page in front of me.
David Senra (01:25:45):
And what you realize, you say on that page where it's just like, was I a little full, you know, the idea is like, I have $1,000. I'm in UT dorm room. I'm going to take on the biggest company in the world. And you said, was I a little full of myself at 19? Sure, I was. I think you have to be to do anything important. Can you explain that mindset? Yeah, I think it's a combination of naivete, right? Which is an important element.
David Senra (01:26:15):
It's like you don't know enough to know that maybe this won't work. Okay. And confidence. But, you know, you never sort of want to go over into the arrogant zone because that's really, I think, a dangerous place to be. So it's like, okay, I have not been in this industry for a long time. And so, you know, all these reasons why it won't work are unknown to me.
David Senra (01:26:49):
Okay. So that's the naive part. Right. And that can actually be sometimes a good thing, right? Because you're not sort of bound by those conventional thinking that maybe are no longer as relevant. Or maybe you come up with some clever new way of doing it. And then, you know, the confidence piece is, all right, I'm going to go make it work. I'm going to go figure it out.
David Senra (01:27:19):
Right. But, you know, there's always that little voice in your head. It's like, well, what if it doesn't work? And, you know, what about this? What about this? And so, you know, you never want to sort of assume, okay, this is absolutely going to work no matter what. Then you're going to ignore those little voices about, well, what about this? What about this? So just so, so, yeah, it's sort of, I think a combination of naivete, being real here, confidence, and confidence.
David Senra (01:27:53):
I think a perfect illustration of that would be your reluctance, initial reluctance to name the company after you because it was PCs limited, right, at the very beginning. It was officially Dell Computer Corporation doing business as PCs limited, right? Yeah, but then you realize, like, why don't we just do Dell? And that's when I thought of the Osborne thing because you're like, wait a minute, this guy, he named his company after that. Like, there's no. No, what if it doesn't work? But it's interesting because you just said, it's like, yeah, I have a lot of confidence I'm going to do this, but the doubt never goes away.
David Senra (01:28:26):
Yeah. And, you know, fear. Thank you. That's actually the last thing I want to talk to you about. When we, one of the first things when we saw each other last month, we talked about, we were like walking around Zach's office. And I don't know how it came up, but it came up almost immediately. And it wasn't a surprise to me because I feel the exact same way. But the fear of failure, in my experience, from studying all these histories to get entrepreneurs, but I think you said the same.
David Senra (01:28:56):
It's just like the fear of failure to this day is a bigger motivator than like the love of success. Yeah, totally. 100%. Yeah, you don't want to fail. Although failing is how you learn. Pain is the best teacher. And so you have to have some little failures along the way.
David Senra (01:29:29):
But that fear of, you know, you can't have it paralyze you where you don't want to make any decisions because you're afraid to fail. Has that happened to you? Not really. No. You know, what you want to do is sort of be incremental. And again, it's back to iterating. It's like, okay, we're not sure if this is a good idea. Let's try it. Let's experiment.
David Senra (01:30:01):
Let's get started. We'll figure it out. And we're not, you know, betting the whole company on this decision. We're just experimenting. And if it doesn't work, great. We learn something. We move on. That's perfectly sense. Thank you for writing the book. Thank you for the time. I really appreciate it, Michael. Thank you, David. I hope you enjoyed this episode. Please remember to subscribe wherever you're listening and leave a review. And make sure you listen to my other podcast, Founders. For almost a decade, I've obsessively read over 400 biographies of history's greatest entrepreneurs, searching for ideas that you can use in your work.
David Senra (01:30:35):
Most of the guests you hear on this show first found me through Founders.
