---
title: "Untitled"
author: Teresa Torres
source_type: book_chapter
book_title: "Continuous Discovery Habits"
chapter_number: 6
scraped_date: '2026-01-19'
---

CHAPTER ONE

THE WHAT AND WHY OF CONTINUOUS DISCOVERY

How do you know that you are making a product or service that your customers want? How do you ensure that you are improving it over time? How do you guarantee that your team is creating value for your customers in a way that creates value for your business? In this book, you’ll learn a structured and sustainable approach to continuous discovery that will help you answer each of these questions, giving you the confidence to act while also preparing you to be wrong. You’ll learn to balance action with doubt, so that you can get started without being blindsided by what you don’t get right.

Let’s start at the beginning. All product teams do a set of activities to decide what to build and then do a different set of activities to build and deliver it. While you’ll learn that these activities can and should overlap and interweave with each other, the work that is required to do each is fundamentally different. In this book, I’ll refer to the work that you do to decide what to build as discovery and the work that you do to build and ship a product as delivery.1 This distinction matters. As you’ll see, many companies put a heavy emphasis on delivery—they focus on whether you shipped what you said you would on time and on budget—while under-investing in discovery, forgetting to assess if you built the right stuff. This book aims to correct for that imbalance.

Discovery isn’t a one-time activity. A digital product is never done. It can and should continue to evolve. As we learn more about our market, as our customers’ needs change, as new technology becomes available, good products adapt. This book will introduce a continuous discovery framework that enables teams to discover brand-new products and to iterate on existing ones. It will help you continuously discover unmet customer needs and the solutions that will address those needs. Before we get into how to do this, let’s take a brief look at how we got here.

The Evolution of Modern Product Discovery

Product management is quickly evolving. Over the past 30 years, with the rise of the Internet, our industry has seen a rapid evolution in how we do both discovery and delivery. As a result, we see tremendous variation in our practice. Product management looks different everywhere. A brief history of the evolution of modern discovery can help us understand why this variation still exists. It can also give us a clear picture of how we can improve, wherever we are in the progression.

For many years, traditional discovery was not done by the product team. In the early days of software, business leaders owned discovery—they decided what to build. Discovery happened once a year in an annual budgeting process, where projects with fixed timelines were assigned to specific engineering teams. A project manager managed the work, budget, and schedule. Sometimes a product manager translated business needs to product requirements, but not always. There were (and still are) many challenges with this way of working. Software development is unpredictable. Projects were often delivered late and over budget. Business needs often trumped customer needs. Teams learned after the product shipped that customers weren’t excited about what they built. This way of working led to a lot of waste. Sadly, I still meet many teams and companies that work this way. Marty Cagan refers to these types of teams as delivery teams.2

Fortunately, in 2001, a group of engineers got fed up, went into the mountains, put their heads together, and came up with the Agile manifesto. This group of software engineers, influenced by the broader industry discussion about the pain points of developing software, proposed a number of principles to correct for what they saw. Projects were too big. Teams spent way too much time building the wrong stuff before they learned that customers didn’t want it. The authors of the Agile manifesto advocated for shorter cycles with more frequent customer feedback. Second, they proposed working at a pace that could be sustained continuously, rather than furiously scurrying from one milestone to another. Third, they advocated for maximum flexibility—having the ability to adapt to customer feedback quickly and easily. And fourth, they advocated for simplicity. They were concerned with how much of what they built was never used or offered limited value and instead advocated for teams to ruthlessly limit what they built. You’ll see these four principles infused throughout the methods in this book.

In the years following the Agile manifesto, teams worked to adopt these principles. We saw a rise in the adoption of Scrum and Kanban, two popular Agile frameworks, to manage delivery work. In parallel, we saw the growth of user-experience design and user research as means for collecting customer feedback. But this way of working also ran into challenges.

Leaders struggled to give up ownership of discovery. Even with shorter cycles and more customer feedback, business stakeholders still clung to their original ideas. Most teams weren’t very good at estimating unpredictable work (who is?), and their shorter cycles, aptly named sprints in Scrum, truly became biweekly sprints, killing any chance of finding a continuously sustainable pace. The rest of the business continued operating on an annual budgeting cycle, making true flexibility nearly impossible. When teams learned something wouldn’t work, they were still expected to deliver it on time and under budget. Usability testing was often done too late in the process, making it hard to address the substantial issues that were so often uncovered. User research was often outsourced to design agencies who did project-based research. And finally, teams continued to be measured by what they delivered, not whether anyone used it or if it created any value for the customer or the business.

However, it wasn’t all bad news. Teams did shorten their delivery cycles. Companies iterated from annual releases to quarterly releases to monthly releases. Today, many teams work on a weekly or even daily release schedule. More frequent releases meant we could measure the impact of what we were building sooner. We got better at instrumenting our products. We got better at usability testing our solutions. We got better at starting small and iterating to bigger solutions. These were giant steps in the right direction. But we still struggled with deciding what to build. We still learned, after shipping code, that we’d built the wrong stuff.

More instrumentation, however, did make us acutely aware of this problem. We could now measure when we released a feature that nobody used, when we redesigned our navigation and our metrics didn’t move, and when we added a product to our portfolio that nobody bought. These were hard lessons to learn. But the upside was that we started to question how we made decisions about what to build. We started with who should make those decisions. We started to push decision-making from business stakeholders to product managers and eventually to the whole product team. We started to question how we made discovery decisions. Instead of making them in conference rooms with just our own thoughts, we started engaging customers throughout the discovery process. Instead of just validating our ideas at the end of discovery, we started co-creating with customers from the very beginning. And our discovery cadence started to change. As our delivery cycles got shorter, so, too, did our discovery cycles. And this is where we are today.

Today, many teams are adopting, developing, and iterating on their own continuous discovery practices. They are engaging with customers on a regular basis. They are testing their assumptions. Rather than just validating their ideas, they are co-creating with customers—combining the team’s knowledge of what’s technically possible with the customer’s knowledge of their own needs, pain points, and desires to build better products. They are doing all of this on a continuous cadence, supporting the continuous development of their products. They are adapting to changes in the market, in customer needs, and in technology, in real time. So can you. This book will show you how.

Who This Book Is For

Most successful digital products today are conceived, designed, built, and delivered by a cross-functional team composed of product managers, designers, and software engineers. Product managers bring the business context—they help teams ensure that the products they are building are viable for the business. They ensure that the business that supports the product will survive over time, allowing the team to further satisfy customers’ needs. Designers bring visual, interactive, and systems-design chops that help to ensure that customers will understand how to best use a product and delight in that use. Software engineers bring the technical chops to ensure that the product is reliable, stable, and delivers on its promise. All three roles are critical to the success of any digital product. They are collectively responsible for ensuring that their products create value for the customer in a way that creates value for the business.

This book was written for product people (product managers, designers, and software engineers) who want to build products that their customers need and love. It outlines a collection of habits that, when deployed continuously week over week, lead to better business outcomes and better customer outcomes. These habits were designed to be adopted by a product trio composed of each of these roles. Throughout the book, the term “product trio” will refer to a product manager, a designer, and a software engineer working together to develop products for their customers.

Now, most digital products require the input of more than three people. Most teams have several engineers contributing to the code base. Some teams have the luxury of having multiple designers or product managers contributing to the same product or unit of work. Additionally, most teams have other roles that contribute to the success of their product, including product marketers, data analysts, user researchers, and customer-success representatives, among others. Defining the product trio as I have done here is not meant to exclude any of these critical roles from the discovery process. Each team needs to define the right “trio” on their team to adopt these habits. I put trio in quotes because your trio might be a quartet or even a quintet.

As you read this book, if you choose to be more inclusive of who engages with these habits, just know that inclusion comes at a cost. The more folks involved in each decision, the longer it will take to reach that decision. You want to balance speed of decision-making with inclusiveness. For most teams, their trio needs to consist of at least a product manager, designer, and software engineer. For some teams it will make sense to add a fourth or even a fifth member to this decision-making squad. I trust you will use your best judgment to find what works best for your team.

And if you don’t work in a product trio right now, don’t worry—you can still adopt many of these habits today. But this book will encourage you to start thinking about how you can more closely collaborate with your cross-functional colleagues.

With your trio defined, let’s turn to the mindsets you’ll each need to develop in order to successfully adopt these continuous discovery habits.

The Prerequisite Mindsets

Many teams chase frameworks, tools, and methodologies, hoping that each new innovation will suddenly unlock the door to product success. However, for most frameworks, tools, and methodologies to be successful, it’s not just your tactics that need to change but also your mindset. The same will be true for the tactics in this book. There are six mindsets that must be cultivated to successfully adopt the habits outlined in this book.

1. Outcome-oriented: The first mindset is both a mindset and a habit. You’ll learn more about the habit in the coming chapters, but the mindset requires that you start thinking in outcomes rather than outputs. That means rather than defining your success by the code that you ship (your output), you define success as the value that code creates for your customers and for your business (the outcomes). Rather than measuring value in features and bells and whistles, we measure success in impact—the impact we have had on our customers’ lives and the impact we have had on the sustainability and growth of our business.

2. Customer-centric: The second mindset places the customer at the center of our world. It requires that we not lose sight of the fact (even though many companies have) that the purpose of business is to create and serve a customer. We elevate customer needs to be on par with business needs and focus on creating customer value as well as business value.

3. Collaborative: The third mindset requires that you embrace the cross-functional nature of digital product work and reject the siloed model, where we hand off deliverables through stage gates. Rather than the product manager decides, the designer designs, and the engineer codes, we embrace a model where we make team decisions while leveraging the expertise and knowledge that we each bring to those decisions.

4. Visual: The fourth mindset encourages us to step beyond the comfort of spoken and written language and to tap into our immense power as spatial thinkers. The habits in this book will encourage you to draw, to externalize your thinking, and to map what you know. Cognitive psychologists have shown in study after study that human beings have an immense capacity for spatial reasoning.3 The habits in this book will help you tap into that capacity.

5. Experimental: The fifth mindset encourages you to don your scientific-thinking hat. Many of us may not have scientific training, but, to do discovery well, we need to learn to think like scientists identifying assumptions and gathering evidence. The habits in this book will help you develop and hone an experimental mindset.

6. Continuous: And finally, these habits will help you evolve from a project mindset to a continuous mindset. Rather than thinking about discovery as something that we do at the beginning of a project, you will learn to infuse discovery continuously throughout your development process. This will ensure that you are always able to get fast answers to your discovery questions, helping to ensure that you are building something that your customers want and will enjoy.

A Working Definition of Continuous Discovery

In my experience working with product teams, many are already adopting many of the discovery activities you will learn about in this book. Customer interviews, usability testing, and A/B testing are pervasive. What is rare is for teams to adopt these discovery activities in a structured and sustainable way, enabling them to continuously infuse their product decisions with customer input. To distinguish teams who occasionally do modern discovery activities from teams who do continuous discovery, we’ll adopt the following definition of continuous discovery:

At a minimum, weekly touchpoints with customers

By the team building the product

Where they conduct small research activities

In pursuit of a desired outcome

Product teams make decisions every day. Our goal with continuous discovery is to infuse those daily decisions with as much customer input as possible. If teams are only engaging with customers on a monthly basis, they are making a month’s worth of decisions without customer input. Over the course of this book, you’ll learn habits that will help you adopt a continuous cadence in a structured and sustainable way. You’ll learn how to do your own research so that you can get fast answers to your daily questions. You’ll learn how to modify traditional research activities to make them sustainable week over week. And most importantly, you’ll learn to ensure that your research is in service of pursuing a desired business outcome while meeting customers’ needs.