---
title: "Untitled"
author: Teresa Torres
source_type: book_chapter
book_title: "Continuous Discovery Habits"
chapter_number: 20
scraped_date: '2026-01-19'
---

CHAPTER TWELVE

MANAGING THE CYCLES

“Trusting the process can give you the confidence to take risks.”

— Chip and Dan Heath, Decisive

Thus far, we’ve worked our way through the continuous discovery habits sequentially. We started by defining a clear desired outcome, we interviewed to discover opportunities, we visually captured and synthesized what we were learning with experience maps and opportunity solution trees, we prioritized a target opportunity, we brainstormed solutions, we identified our hidden assumptions, we rapidly tested those assumptions, and we continued to measure impact all the way through delivery. It’s easy to think that, if we simply follow the process, we’ll come out the other side with a product that customers love. Unfortunately, it’s not that simple. The reality is this process is a messy, winding path with lots of twists and turns. Most of the work in discovery is not following the process—it’s managing the cycles.

In this chapter, I’ll highlight stories of real product teams who, throughout the course of their discovery work, learned something surprising along the way. The surprise required that they stop charging forward and instead loop back to a previous step. You’ll meet a team at Simply Business, a UK-based insurance company, who learned after testing a series of solutions that their opportunity wasn’t as important to their customers as they had originally reported. You’ll meet a team at CarMax who tackled an evergreen opportunity by breaking it up into sub-opportunities and used assumption testing to figure out what they could do now versus what they might have to push off to later. You’ll meet a team at Farm Credit Services of America who uncovered a key value proposition that could have put their entire outcome at risk, but instead used their discovery work to drive the outcome while preserving the value proposition. And finally, you’ll meet a team at Snagajob who had the luxury of embedding with a customer and how they used that opportunity to improve customer satisfaction across their customer base.

As you read through these stories, pay particular attention to how and when the teams had to loop back to an earlier habit to help them get unstuck or to work around a new constraint. Notice how, despite these surprises, it was the same core discovery habits that helped them find their way.

Simply Business: Not All Opportunities Need Solutions

Mina Kasherova, a Senior Product Manager at Simply Business, and her team kept hearing about the same pain point in most of their customer interviews: the havoc of late client payments. Simply Business is one of the UK’s biggest business-insurance providers, specializing in public-liability insurance for small-to-midsize enterprises and insuring more than 750,000 small businesses, landlords, and not-for-profit organizations. Many of Simply Business’s customers are freelancers and small-business owners who often struggle with clients not paying invoices on time, creating financial strain. Not only did the team hear about this pain point in a number of their customer interviews, but they also had market research and government data that suggested that late payments were a top problem for small businesses.

When Mina’s team started assessing and prioritizing the opportunity space, choosing this opportunity as their target opportunity was a no-brainer. They generated several solutions and identified a diverse set of three to test: 1) articles to educate small-businesses owners on how to prevent late payments, 2) the ability to offer discounts for early payments, and 3) a service that automated payment collection.

Within a week, they were able to launch three assumption tests, one for each idea. To test if their customers were willing to read content about how to prevent late payments, they integrated a couple of existing blog articles about late payments onto their customer-account page and measured how many customers clicked through to read them. For invoice discounting and automatic payment collection, their riskiest assumptions were around the complexity of each of these ideas. They wanted to start by testing if customers understood each of the offerings. They mocked up a summary of each program and used an unmoderated usability-testing tool to ask small-business owners who had recently had challenges with late payments to read through the summary and explain what they thought each program offered. They then asked each participant to explain if the offering would have helped them collect on their most recent late payment. They were primarily interested in evaluating if the participants fully understood the benefits of each solution.

Unfortunately, the first assumption test failed. A very small percentage of customers clicked through to read the articles about how to prevent late payments. The team was concerned that the customer-account page might not be the right place to integrate the content and started to brainstorm other places to share the content. But they stopped once they watched the videos from their other two tests. Not only did most participants struggle to understand the solutions, but most also expressed that, while they had issues with late payments, they weren’t interested in third-party help in solving the problem. They each expressed that they had strong relationships with their clients, and they felt that removing themselves from the collections process would harm the relationship.

This was a big surprise for Mina’s team. Even though they had heard late payments come up as a pain point in interview after interview and they had market research reinforcing what they had heard, the results of their assumption tests were clear. Their customers did not want Simply Business to help them with this problem. Now, to be clear, this doesn’t mean there wasn’t a real need here. However, the team realized it wasn’t a need that they could address in the short term. It was no longer the highest-impact opportunity that they should tackle next.

Thankfully, Mina’s team had a strong habit of weekly interviews. So, when they revisited their opportunity solution tree to choose a new target opportunity, they weren’t starting from scratch. Their tree continued to evolve as they ran their assumption tests, and they already had a clear idea of what opportunity might be next. You might remember Raya Raycheva’s comment about the value of continuous interviewing from Chapter 5: “We killed an opportunity on Tuesday, chose a new one on Wednesday, and used our already-scheduled interviews on Thursday to learn about the new opportunity.” Raya was the User Research Lead on Mina’s team.

Mina and her team’s story illustrates why it’s so important not to get bogged down in analysis paralysis when assessing and prioritizing opportunities. All the data pointed in one direction, but when they started assumption testing, they collected another piece of the puzzle that completely changed the landscape. That’s going to happen. Fortunately, because Mina’s team moved quickly, they invested only a week into an opportunity that wasn’t going to be fruitful. Compare that to the weeks or months that many teams spend building the wrong features, and this hiccup is no big deal. Mina’s team also had the discipline and the wisdom to recognize when they were going down a troublesome path, and they quickly course-corrected. These course-corrections should be celebrated. The fruit of discovery work is often the time we save when we decide not to build something.

CarMax: The Importance of Now, Next, Future

As Senior Product Manager on the CarMax Digital Merchandising Experience team, Victoria Lawson was focused on displaying cars in a way that would ignite desire and ultimately lead customers to purchase a car. She compares the user experience to a dating site, where the goal is for a customer to “find the right one and make a commitment,” only in CarMax’s case, it’s with a vehicle rather than another human being.

Through the course of customer interviews, Victoria’s team identified the target opportunity: “I want to feel confident that this car is in good condition.” Additionally, they saw new competitors start to highlight the cosmetic condition of their vehicles by visually indicating where a vehicle had dings, dents, or scratches, and Victoria’s team was hearing from consumers that they appreciated having this information. Many product teams would simply copy what their competitors were doing, but for Victoria’s team, it wasn’t that simple. A key value proposition for CarMax vehicles is that they go through an inspection-and-reconditioning process that fixes many of the cosmetic issues that their competitors were highlighting. Odds are, if a competitor is highlighting a ding on a vehicle, CarMax couldn’t highlight that same ding on their vehicle, because they would have fixed it in their reconditioning process. Would consumers understand that CarMax wasn’t highlighting dings, dents, and scratches because they had fixed them?

Victoria’s team had several questions they needed to answer before they could tackle this opportunity. While consumers were saying they valued the cosmetic condition of a vehicle, Victoria’s team didn’t want to take this for granted. They started by testing how much cosmetic conditioning impacted a consumer’s purchase decision. To test whether customers were accurately describing their own priorities, Victoria’s team set up a test in which they had wireframe versions of the same car—one had minor cosmetic issues and was $1,000 cheaper, while the other had no cosmetic issues but cost $1,000 more. Through this testing, they learned that people were willing to pay more for cars that were cosmetically reconditioned. This was a key learning, because it meant that CarMax’s reconditioning value proposition was important to customers.

Next, they had to figure out how to communicate this value proposition to their customers. Victoria’s team had two primary strategies for how they might do this. They could try to address the opportunity by highlighting the value of CarMax’s inspection-and-reconditioning program (a more generalized approach), or they could address it by sharing vehicle-specific reconditioning information (e.g., “A ding was removed”). Due to the volume of cars CarMax sells and the work that would be required to test vehicle-specific concepts, Victoria’s team knew that the quickest path to drive customer value would be to leverage general reconditioning to solve this opportunity, and wanted to prioritize discovery in that space before exploring larger efforts around vehicle-specific solutions.

Victoria’s team knew that customers primarily evaluated cosmetic condition by viewing photos of the car. So, they experimented with adding text overlays on top of the images that highlighted CarMax’s reconditioning work (e.g., “No major dings or dents”). The image gallery is one of the most engaged areas on the page, so the team established a high test threshold to ensure that they were truly solving the customer opportunity and could justify the high-visibility placement of the content. However, after several experiments, they were still unable to meet the test thresholds. Their changes did help consumers build trust in CarMax’s inspection-and-reconditioning process, but they were still hearing from consumers that they wanted vehicle-specific information to truly build confidence in a specific car’s condition. After a series of attempts, Victoria’s team concluded that they had done as much as they could at this moment in time to address their target opportunity. They learned that, to really solve it, they would need to consider vehicle-specific solutions. Since these types of solutions would require a much larger investment from multiple teams, Victoria’s team knew that, to deliver solutions to truly meet their customer needs, they would need to push this opportunity into the future.

Victoria’s team story is a great example of the temporal nature of opportunity selection. While we might assume that we’ll tackle all of the opportunities on our trees with time, there are some opportunities that are a better fit to tackle right now vs. in the future. Victoria’s team chose an opportunity that they thought they could tackle quickly by leveraging CarMax’s strong brand, however, they learned that consumers really needed vehicle-specific solutions and, as a result, the team had to defer this particular opportunity to later. Again, it turned out fine. Victoria’s team simply went back to assessing and prioritizing the opportunity space and chose a new short-term target opportunity. They were still able to make short-term progress toward their desired outcome, while laying the groundwork for even more impact down the road. With time, their discovery work helped them successfully make the case to invest in vehicle-specific solutions. Today, they are able to integrate vehicle-specific data about parts that were replaced during their reconditioning process, which reinforces CarMax’s reconditioning value proposition with its customers. Many teams shy away from hard problems—it’s easier to focus on low-hanging fruit. But Victoria’s story shows the value of balancing the short-term with the long-term. They looked for quick wins, but when they didn’t pan out, they used their discovery work to make the case to go after the harder solutions.

FCSAmerica: Balancing Customer Value With Business Needs

Carl Horne is the VP of Digital Products & Services at Farm Credit Services of America (FCSAmerica). When farmers, ranchers, or other agri-businesses need credit or other financial services, they go to FCSAmerica. And this is a big decision, because agriculture requires a lot of capital (most loans range from several hundred thousand to several million dollars).

Carl’s team had the goal of engaging with customers digitally. This was a broad goal that could be interpreted in many different ways, but they chose to focus on the website experience. FCSAmerica had traditionally provided a high-touch personal experience, so business leaders wondered if they could make some of their resources self-service. But this led to a potential problem. Customers regularly shared that they liked talking to their financial officer, and they considered this to be a trusted relationship. Would customers be willing to give up that trusted relationship for the convenience of a digital experience?

Through the course of customer interviews, Carl’s team learned that many of their customers were already researching online to figure out how much property they could afford. This led Carl’s team to identify “What can I afford?” as an opportunity that they might be able to address digitally.

They experimented to figure out how to address this opportunity with an online calculator. The idea was that a potential customer could enter the relevant information and the calculator would provide the answer, similar to an online mortgage calculator. In this scenario, the calculator would be a self-serve option for customers.

But since they’d heard from customers that human interaction was important, Carl’s team was concerned that an online calculator might not be sufficient. Would customers trust the results? Or would they still seek advice from their financial officer? They experimented with offering a chat feature alongside the calculator so a person would be online during business hours to answer customers’ questions live. These experiments demonstrated clearly that customers did not want to talk to a person at this stage of the application process. No matter what they did to change the wording or the images, customers would consistently close out of the browser to avoid interacting via chat.

Through these experiments, Carl’s team came to two critical conclusions: The human touch wasn’t needed during the calculation stage—it was more important later in the process—and the opportunity of “What can I afford?” was something Carl’s team could solve digitally.

They iteratively built the online calculator, and, today, that product has grown into their successful FarmLend program, a service that enables farmers and ranchers to apply online—rather than through their branches—for financing. Carl’s team was able to identify an existing need where their customers were already comfortable engaging online and used that as a starting point to teach their customers how to engage digitally. Their FarmLend customers still engage with and benefit from a trusted relationship with their financial officer, but they do much more of the loan process digitally through the FarmLend website.

Snagajob: Iterating Through Small Opportunities for Big Impact

At Snagajob, an hourly work marketplace, Product Manager Amy O’Callaghan and Product Designer Jenn Atkins were always trying to solve one core problem: How could they connect people who need work with the people who need workers in a satisfying way for both parties?

In an attempt to answer that question, Amy and Jenn were working on improving their net promoter score (NPS) as their desired outcome. They dove into NPS comments and interview feedback and identified several opportunities. Two of these opportunities were already very familiar: “I don’t have enough applications” and “I don’t have the right applications.” But they were surprised to uncover a brand-new opportunity: “I can’t get in touch with my candidates.” As they spoke with hiring managers, Amy and Jenn discovered that they could rarely connect with candidates on the phone. Only about one in ten candidates answered the phone when a hiring manager called, and hardly any of them returned the call after receiving a voicemail message from a hiring manager.

Through their customer interviews, Amy and Jenn learned that this was an issue with every applicant from all hiring platforms—not just Snagajob. This meant they had a “big, hairy problem that no one understood, which would be a major, multi-faceted win for us if we solved it.”

But the challenge with a “big, hairy problem,” as Amy and Jenn describe it, is that it can be difficult to address. Where do you even start?

The way Amy and Jenn approached it was by going on “walkabouts” to nearby retail stores and restaurants and asking to speak to the hiring manager. Through these conversations, they started establishing relationships with local business owners, asking about their hiring needs and offering to be their unpaid, personal hiring assistants, typically for a 30-day period. Describing this experience, they say, “It was exhausting, illuminating, and amazing.”

Through their in-depth research, Amy and Jenn discovered a number of smaller sub-opportunities that helped them better understand why hiring managers were struggling to get in touch with candidates. One of their first big discoveries was that calling candidates was ineffective. Amy and Jenn ran a quick test that proved that, even when a candidate said they preferred phone calls, they were unlikely to answer a call from a hiring manager. Through experimentation, they realized that the applicant’s persona had fundamentally changed. They were mobile first. They preferred texting to talking on the phone. Many of them didn’t even have their voicemail set up properly.

When Amy and Jenn pivoted to texting candidates, they saw an immediate improvement in response rate. First, they would text to ask if it was a good time to call before calling a candidate. When that went well, they began exploring other ways to communicate via text—most often attempting to ask follow-up questions and schedule interviews. They tried sending texts both as people and as bots, but quickly realized this was only a temporary solution, since most hiring managers would not want to use their personal devices to text candidates.

They knew that, to solve this problem, it had to work for both the candidates and the hiring manager. So, they started looking for mobile-first, web-accessible tools that allowed managers to communicate via text and candidates to answer from a phone. They would send a text asking candidates if they’d be willing to answer a few follow-up questions on their application. If they answered “Yes,” they would send them a link to a SurveyMonkey form. This was easy to set up and fill out on a mobile device. This small tweak allowed them to connect with candidates in a way that simply wasn’t happening before.

Once they were able to successfully connect hiring managers with candidates, they discovered the next problem: Finding a time to schedule interviews required a lot of back and forth. Amy and Jenn continued making small iterations and improvements like these until, finally, they had a well-oiled interview-scheduling machine. And once they tackled that, they learned about the next hurdle: Interview no-shows. But they continued to chip away at one opportunity at a time. Looking back, they can’t say that one single opportunity was responsible for their success, but marching across their tree one opportunity at a time is what allowed them to deliver on their desired outcome.

Amy’s and Jenn’s story illustrates how iteratively tackling small opportunities can add up to have a large impact on an outcome. When first getting started, it can be hard to see how starting with a small problem will ever amount to anything. But if you keep at it and work the cycles, small changes start to snowball, and you start to see the collective impact of working across your tree. Addressing sub-opportunities over time eventually addresses parent opportunities. And addressing parent opportunities is your path to consistently driving product outcomes.

Avoid These Common Anti-Patterns

As you manage the cycles of continuous discovery, be sure to avoid these common anti-patterns.

Overcommitting to an opportunity. Throughout your discovery, you will uncover opportunities that are important to your customers that you won’t be able to deliver on. We saw this in Mina’s story at Simply Business. It’s quite possible that someone else will solve late payments for small-business owners. It may even be a Simply Business competitor who does so. However, given the context in which Mina’s team was working—what her company was asking of her and what she was learning from her customers—it turned out not to be the right opportunity for her right now. This doesn’t mean her team can’t return to it later down the road.

We also saw this come up in Victoria’s story. Her team had the resources to address the need in a specific way—with CarMax generalized data, not vehicle-specific data. When they learned that generalized data wasn’t sufficient, they chose a new target opportunity instead of continuing with an opportunity that they knew they weren’t in a position to address right now.

One of the hardest challenges with opportunity selection is identifying the right opportunity for right now. However, a round of assumption tests should help you assess fit quickly. These stories are a good reminder of why we want to run quick tests rather than overinvest in the best tests.

Avoiding hard opportunities. Some teams interpret continuous delivery to mean continuous delivery of easy solutions. Quick wins have a time and a place in our work. If we can deliver impact this week, we should. However, many of the opportunities we uncover will take time to address adequately. Don’t confuse quick testing and iterative delivery with easy solutions. You saw in Chapter 11 that, at AfterCollege, we were able to find a quick test of a hard solution. Before we invested months into building a robust machine-learning solution, we started with a crude approximation that we could prototype in a few days.

We also saw this mindset in Victoria’s story. When her team learned that they had tapped as much of the potential as they could out of generalized data, they didn’t shirk away from vehicle-specific data. They started to lay the groundwork for those types of solutions by working with other teams. In the meantime, they worked another opportunity in parallel. This allowed them to both deliver impact now and lay the groundwork for even more impact in the future.

Drawing conclusions from shallow learnings. As you learned in Chapter 2, discovery requires strong critical-thinking skills. Otherwise, it’s easy to draw fast conclusions from shallow learnings. We saw this in Carl’s FarmLend story. Once hearing that customers valued picking up the phone to talk to their loan officer, Carl’s team could have abandoned their digital-engagement strategy. But instead, they asked the harder question, “How can we reconcile our business need with our customers’ needs?” And as a result, they found an opportunity where their customers did want to engage digitally, and they used that opportunity to grow their digital relationship with their customers. They did the work to uncover the depth behind their shallow learning. Their customers did value their relationship with their financial officer. But they were also willing to do plenty of research on their own. Carl’s team worked to tease out these nuances and were rewarded for it.

Giving up before small changes have time to add up. While you do want to measure the impact of your product changes, don’t expect to see large step-function results from every change. Oftentimes it takes a series of changes to move the needle on our outcome. We saw this in Amy’s and Jenn’s story at Snagajob. Every time they solved one problem, it opened the door to the next problem. But they kept at it and, over time, had a big impact on their desired outcome.